<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         
         
         AN ESSAY OF
the Meanes hovv to
make our Trauailes, into forraine
Countries, the more profitable
and honourable.
         
            
               VERITAS TVA ET VSQVE AD NVBES
               printer's or publisher's device
            
         
         At London
Imprinted, by H. L. for Mathew
Lownes. 1606.
      
      
         
         
         To the Reader.
         HAuing framed this discourse long since for
mine owne aduertisement, what might and
ought to be done by Trauaile; and now considering
the manifould errors and misprisions,
that the greater sort of such as trauaile into
forraine Countries, haue heretofore committed
(because these dayes wherein we now liue
are no lesse disordered, then when pilgrimages were on foote) and how
few haue arriued vnto that perfectiō which was requirable, for the wāt
of a Guide or Counsellor, to aduise & aduertise them of the fairer and
more readie way, to make their trauailes somewhat more profitable and
honorable: I haue been encouraged (worthy Reader) vpō the vertue
of the yonger sort of such noble gentlemen as intend so recōmendable a
course, to prepare and addresse the same, by way of Essay; the rather
also for that, in other languages, I haue suruayed some of like proiect,
for other Nations, who I am sure stand not more in neede then wee in
this State doe. Protesting (as in the inferiornesse of the stile may well
appeare, that neither vanitie of glorie, nor selfe presumption (being of
many the most vnworthie to haue enterprised this taske) nor other priuate
respect then dutie to my good friends (that haue requested this at
my hands) and Zeale to my louing Countriemen, hath made me publish
it. For, considering of all voluntarie Commendable actions, that
of trauailing into forraine States (vndertaken and performed Regularly)
is the most behoueable & to be regarded in this Common-weale,
both for the publike and priuate good thereof, singularly also for that
the same is not vndergone with ordinarie charge, care, hazard, or taking
of paines, but of most vncertaine issue and commoditie to Trauailers:
It seemeth vnto mee (vertuous Reader) a faire dutie
(where other worthie men haue beene so long silent, in giuing a perfect
rule for Trauailing, as it is in vse at this day) to begin the hewing
out of one, that by some master workeman, it may hereafter be better
planted, formed, and tried.
         
            
Moreouer, I thought good, for the informatiō of some Readers, to vncouer
my intent in sundrie points therin cōtained. And first, that wheras
diuers other sortes of Trauailers are mentioned thē those Generall
Voluntaries, (for whom this discourse was framed) they are honoris
gratia, & obiter Salutati; and rather by way of order, then worthie
to receiue direction, mentioned. Secondly, that whereas by the found of
some words, some people and Nations may thinke they be taxed in certaine
points, notwithstanding therein I may say, Nihil iam quod
non prius ab omnibus dictum fuit: yet I trust, the honest Reader
will perceiue may meaning to bend rather to the rectifying, then preiudicing
of any. Thirdly, where any point is obserued by way of secreat or
policie, that no other Construction be made thereof, then the literall,
to ensample and aduance knowledge. Fourthly, that considering for
the priuate respect of the most vnexpert, more Minute Subdiuisions
and points are cōtained, then per aduenture will rellish with the taste of
some; that such will take for their better stomacke the benefit of those
Marginall notes, which for their sakes I haue set downe. Lastly, seeing
not only we here in England may, as all other Nations in the world
doe, account it a shame that there should be so many and such fugitiues
(vnworthie of the honourable name of Trauailers) as this Land hath
affourde hertofore, who haue not afterwards made conscience of their
owne wayes nor of others, but like the most pernitious haue communicated
with all euill and mischiefe in their trauailes, to subiect their own
Countrie, Princes, State, Parents, friends and all that is held deare in
this life; let me discouer so much of my secretest affections vnto thee
(discreet Reader) that the preuenting hereof, was one of the first motiues
to vndertake this worke. And so I heartily pray to God to make
thee happie in all vertue and godlinesse, and to set to thy helping hand,
as much as in thee lyeth, to encounter that imputation to our Countrie:
leauing vnto thy discreete iudgement, moreouer, these Tables which
are here abstracted for the ease and aide of mens memories. And
so I bid thee farwell. From Wingham, the first of Iulie. 1606.
         
            Tho. Pal.
         
      
      
         
         TO THE MOST
Excellent, Illustrious, and vertuous
Prince, HENRIE, eldest Sonne to our Soueraigne
Lord the King, and Heire apparant to the Kingdomes
of Great Britaine, &c.
(inverted ⁂)
         COnsidering with what libertie and
Applause, Princes, in times past,
vndertook voluntarie trauaile &
aduentures into forraine parts:
and how of latter dayes those
Illustrious Stemmes of noblenesse
(I know not now by what custome restrained
of that recreation and renowne) haue notwithstanding
improued their pretious times at
home vnto no lesse rent of commoditie & commendablenes,
by suffering themselues to be trayned
vp and delighted in the faculties and knowledge
of diuine and humane things: I haue presumed
(most excellent and gratious Prince) humbly
to prefer, vnto your rare protectiō and view,

this Essay, of the means how to make the trauailes
of other men (who for the good of this kingdom
wherein they liue so happily, their better seruice
to his Maiestie, and making of themselues more
Compleat in all things, haue faire libertie & desire
to aduenture trauaile) somewhat more profitable
and honorable, not only before trauaile, but
in the interim of trauaile, and after their returnes.
First, because your highnesse is (in all happie possibilitie)
to be a most noble Iudge of all mens deserts
in this point, rather then to make experience
your selfe therin, vnlesse in Martial causes: wherin
I know not whether I may account your royall
Auncestors (Princes of this State) to bee more
happie alwaies in their good successe, or in the
faithfulnesse of their voluntarie great traines. Secondly,
for that the people of great Britaine (of
all other famous and glorious Nations separated
from the maine Continent of the world) are by
so much the more interessed to become Trauailers,
by how much the necessitie of euerie seuerall
estate of men doth require that, for their better
aduancement. Lastly, in regard this subiect hath
not worne an English habite hertofore, (from the
custom dew to Princes in the Novelty of things)
I thought it my dutie (vnder the compasse of my
obligation and seruice vnto your Highnesse) to
make a present hereof (although but meanly apparelled
and suited) and in most humble wise to

beseech the greatnesse of your Excellencie, to
fauour & patronize the same. Which gratiousnes
I must euer acknowledge (sir) to proceede from
the cleare fountain of your generous, ingenuous,
and princely disposition vnto all bountie, goodnesse
and vertue: and the world alreadie knowes,
that your singular towardlines, to euerie good &
perfect thing, is such, that neither can it or is likely
to be paralleled of any in the world (so long as
your Highnesse continews in these religious vertuous
& studious paths, which God graunt) nor
circumscribed within the Kings most Ample
kingdomes, and States, but is knowen, feared, or
admired in forrain parts. The which as it is a most
Soueraine and inexpressible blessing vnto all, of
these his Maiesties Dominions: So, vnto mee, it
shal be the onely studie & care to make expressiō
of all dutifull alleageance: And in the meane
seafō to pray vnto God cōtinually for your highnesse,
to continue for euer in health, felicitie and
euerlasting glorie, And rest during life
         
            Your HIGHNES
most humble and
deuoted Seruant,
THOMAS PALMER.
         
      
      
         
         
            Trauailing is either

                  1, Regular: Of Regular Trauailers some be

                        1. Nonuoluntaries, Sent out by the prince, & imployed in matters of

                              1. Peace,

                                    1. Honorable

                                          1. Ambassadors
                                          2. Commissioners
                                          3. Messengers

                                                1, To know well

                                                      1. From whom they are sent.
                                                      2. To whom they are sent.
                                                      3. To be perfect in their businesse.
                                                      4. Themselues that are sent.
                                                      5. The Countreys from whom, and to whom.
                                                   
                                                
                                                2. To practise

                                                      1. Eloquence to obtaine.
                                                      2. Prudence in accusing, excusing, demanding, denying, propounding, answering &c.
                                                      3. Liberalitie.
                                                      4. Honestie
                                                      5. Humanitie, and Ciuilitie.
                                                      6. Faithfulnesse, Care, and
                                                      7. Obseruation.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2. not Honorable:

                                          1. Posts are recommendable for speede and faithfulnesse.
                                          2. Intelligencers

                                                1. Base,
                                                2. Honest:

                                                      1. To be expert in the Tongues.
                                                      2. To resemble all gestures and behauiours.
                                                      3. To be well furnished of all necessaries.
                                                      4. To be secret aboue ordinarie.
                                                      5. To be able to endure all things.
                                                      6. To keepe themselues from being knowen for Intelligencers.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. Warre.

                                    1. Chieftaines and Cōmanders,

                                          1. To be alwayes prouident and faithfull.
                                          2. Neuer to exceede Commission.
                                          3. To make diligent and true relation.
                                       
                                    
                                    2. Common Souldiers,

                                          1. To be obseruant to the discipline.
                                          2. To make account of his Armes.
                                          3. Neuer to mutinie.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. Inuoluntaries,

                              1. Banished persons

                                    1. By the course of the Law.
                                    2. By the displeasure of the King:

                                          1. Not to murmure for their banishment.
                                          2. To depart the land within the time limited.
                                          3. Not to trauaile into the countrey that is enemie to their Prince, or to God.
                                          4. Alwayes to discouer fruits of allegeance to their Prince and Countrey.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2, Persecuted for a good conscience, must obserue these things:

                                    1. Before trauaile,

                                          1. To be sure that no licencious affect moue them.
                                          2. To be assured that they flie for the trueths sake, and that they imbrace the right religion
                                          3. To know that they cannot get a toleration of that right Religion, nor to haue libertie of conscience.
                                          4. To sue for licence of the Magistrate.
                                          5. To resolue to goe into that Countrey where the word of God is preached: or into a free estate and neuter.
                                       
                                    
                                    2, In Trauaile,

                                          1. To serue God sincerely.
                                          2. To obey the lawes of that Countrey.
                                          3. Not contending for this or that discipline.
                                          4. Not to liue idlely or in excesse.
                                          5. Not to intermeddle with the politick gouernment or State.
                                          6. Neuer treacherous to their owne Prince or State.
                                       
                                    
                                    3, Being returned from Trauaile,

                                          1. No Busie bodies, Schismatickes, or mouers of Sedition.
                                          2. To liue a quiet, peaceable and godly life.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        3, Voluntaries.
                     
                  
                  2, Irregular. *
               
            
         
         
            
            Page I. B. The rest of the first Part, abstracted.
            Voluntary Regular Trauailers are considered,

                  1, As they are moued accidētally:

                        1, Principally, that afterwards they may leade a more quiet and contented life, to the glory of God.
                        2, Secondarily, regarding ends,

                              1, Publicke: which doe consider

                                    1, What persons are inhibited trauaile:

                                          1, Such as Nature,

                                                1, Infants.
                                                2, Decrepite persons.
                                             
                                          
                                          2, Such as Imperfectiō,

                                                1, Fooles.
                                                2, Madmen.
                                                3, Lunaticke.
                                             
                                          
                                          3, Such as the Sexe,

                                                Women.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2, What times to trauaile in are

                                          1, Not fitte: When

                                                1, Our Countrey, is ingaged with Ciuill warres: or,
                                                2, The same expecteth forraine warres.
                                             
                                          
                                          2, Fitte:

                                                1, When one may reape most profit in shortest time, for that hee aimeth at.
                                                2, When the Countrey, into which wee would trauaile, holdeth not ours in iealousie.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    3, What age is most meete to trauaile in:

                                          1, Not the Nonage.
                                          2, Not Old age.
                                          3, But the Middle age.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2, Priuate.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2, As they consist Essentially:

                        1. Nobles,

                              1, Generall: of whom, looke in the second Part. *
                              2, Special:

                                    1, Diuines,

                                          1, In what Cases they may not trauaile.

                                                1. If there bee preaching of the Gospel in their Countrey.
                                                2, If Licence can not bee obtained of the State.
                                                3, If godly and learned Professors liue in the State.
                                             
                                          
                                          2, For what pretences they may trauaile, hauing obtained Licence.

                                                1. To a generall Councell approoued by the State.
                                                2, To a famous Librarie.
                                                3, To haue conference with such and such famous Learned men.
                                                4, To haue conference with such and such Linguists, that are famous for the Hebrew, and Greeke Tongues.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2, Ciuilians,

                                          1, To be well grounded in Religion, and stedfast in the same.
                                          2, To be studious in their obseruations.
                                          3, To take Degrees.
                                       
                                    
                                    3, Souldiers,

                                          1, Contemplatiue,
                                          2, Actiue are to note these things,

                                                1, Before trauaile,

                                                      1, To be expert in the Mathematickes.
                                                      2, To remoue discōtentednes.
                                                      3, To be assured that they may be spared.
                                                      4. To accustome themselues to hardnesse.
                                                      5, To serue where the Prince most fauoureth.
                                                      6, To serue in those warres, where a man may soonest proue a good Souldier.
                                                   
                                                
                                                2, In Trauaile,

                                                      1, To make diligent obseruation of all things.
                                                      2, To bee studious in obseruing the discipline.
                                                      3, Rather to put vp iniuries, than to offer any.
                                                      4, Neither to serue vnder Infidels, nor against professors of the Gospel, or in an vniust war.
                                                      5, To vse the warre as no profession, but to liue in peace the better afterwards.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    4, Physicians,

                                          1. To make diligent obseruation of all Common and Accidentall things.
                                          2, To be aswell expert as learned.
                                          3, To be carefull to transplant what may profit their Countrey.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2, Commons,

                              1, Merchants,

                                    1, Venturers,
                                    2, Of Companies,

                                          1, To know by what Commodities their Countrey may be benefited.
                                          2, Not to transport things prohibited, or to bring in vaine and hurtfull matters.
                                          3, To conceale the secrets of their Princes State, and to obserue of other nations what is meete.
                                       
                                    
                                    3, Men of Warre,

                                          1, Not to transgresse their Commission.
                                          2, To obserue diligently for Nauigation.
                                          3, To make faithfull relation of things needefull.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2, Machanickes. *
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   
   
      
         
         
         The first Part.
         TRauailing is equiuocable, Regular
or Irregular. Of Irregular trauelling,Trauayling duple.
most men finde by experience
what it is.Regular trauailing. The Regular is
an honorable or honest action of
men (and in speciall cases of women)
into forreine Countries and
States, chiefly for a publike good to that Countrie of
which such are, and also for a priuate benefit and necessitie
in cases necessarie and of commendablenesse. In
like sort there are deriued,Two orders of Trauaylers. Regular Trauailers triple. Foure things of Trauailers obserued. from this action of trauelling,
two orders of Trauellers, Regular, and Irregular.
The Regular are threefould; Non voluntarie, Inuoluntarie,
or Voluntarie. Of whome foure things may bee
considered. First what ought to be the moouing causes
of mens trauell. Secondly, what courses such as are
iustly mooued must vndertake before trauell, if they will
benefit their Countrie, or themselues. Thirdly, how they
ought to spend their times in the interim of trauell.

Lastly, what commendable carriages and behauiour
such are to expresse at their returnes, to the further honour
of themselues, good of the State, and glorie of
God.
         The first of these according to the ancient diuision of
Causes hath fowre head mouers; but it may be impertinent
to intreat of aboue two,Two moouing causes: efficiēt and finall. at this present, namely
of the efficient and finall. For, the formall esteemed
causes (which are pedestriall, equestriall, or nauticall)
stand either at the disposition of the efficient; or
pretend perfection and vse from the finall. In like manner
the materiall causes which pertaine either to the
bodie or the minde, though in subiect they differ not alwayes,
yet in consideration of the places and the things
in them contained, being obiects to be respected, may
either depende vpon the pleasure of the efficient, or
from the finall draw their motion and contentation.
         There are only three iust efficients (next vnder God,Three efficiēts secondary of Trauailers.
which is the efficient of all good things in a secret manner)
that ought to stirre vp men to trauell from their
Countrie (which as a parent tyeth all in duetie to respect
it before sorteine parts: and wherein euerie one ought
to leade his life godly and soberly, to aduance the
Common-weale thereof.) Those are first the pleasure
of the prince,The princes pleasure. or State, or Law vnder which men
liue. The second in number, though in order preferable
aboue all things in the world, is the maintenance and
exercise of true Religion and Godlinesse.The maintenance of Religion. The
third is a godly thought to do good in the Church and
Common-weale,The hope to do good in the Church and Common-weale. grounded either vpon probable reason,
or vndertaken for priuate necessitie and respect.
Seeing the two former belong either to Non voluntarie

or Inuoluntarie trauellers, it shall bee the more sparingly
discoursed of them; in regarde the Voluntarie are the
the true subiects of our point in hand.
         The Persons,Non Voluntaries duple. first occasioned to trauell by the Princes
or States fauour, are either men of peace, or men of
warre. Those of peace are either honorable or not,
according to the circumstances of places, persons and
times to whom and in what times they are sent. The
honourable be either Embassadors,Honorable Non Voluntaries. Non Voluntaries not honorable. Commissioners, or
Messengers with or without credence. The not honorable
be Postes and such like Currers necessarie in
States to aduertise Princes speedily concerning their
mindes, or such as goe vnder the name of Intelligencers.
         As cōcerning the honourable, though the prouidence
of euerie Prince State make election of meete personages
to vndergoe such charge as is committed vnto
them; and are euer well instructed concerning principall
matters and momentall: yet for other mens obseruations,Fiue circumstāces required of the honorable Non Voluntaries.
there are fiue circumstāces required of these
principall Trauellers, to bee considered. First, from
whom such are sent. Secondly, to whome and to what
gouernement. Thirdly, what is their Embassage in speciall.
Fourthly, what they themselues are, so chosen to
vndergoe the office of Embassadors, of Commissioners
or Messengers. And fiftly, that the States of those Coūtries
& fashiō of the people, as welfrom whence as vnto
which they are sent, be pondered at the time of their legation:
which shal enable thē the more to be answerable
in all points of cōsequencie; that the Prince sending may
be cōpleatly serued & honored; that the State or Prince,
to whome, may accordingly admire and haue the

Embassage and them in recommendation, that the Embassage
may take best effect. And lastly, that no reproche
chance vnto them either concerning their traines or
themselues, but contrariwise commendation & reward.
Moreouer it is required of such that they be eloquent,Vertues and faculties, required in Ambassadours. to
obtaine and efect that which they plead for in negotiations:
prudent in accusing, excusing, demanding, denying,
and such like politicke affaires: liberall, honest,
humane, popular, but with respect, ciuile in words and
ceremonies, faithfull aboue all, carefull to dispatch affaires,
and painefull to ripen and prepare them, and lastly
obseruant in forreine affaires to get intelligēce. These
may be sufficient at this present.
         As touching the not honorable, though wee might
be also silent & passe thē ouer for the reasō aforesaid,
yet let these things be remembred.Postes. First, that Postes,
whether mediatly, or immediatly, be speedy and faithful
to put in execution things committed to their charge.
Secondly,Intelligencers. as concerning Intelligencers and Referendaries,
being persons of notable esteeme to support the
policie of the Estate by the knowledge of the secrets of
forreine powers and daily occurrences that chaunce in
them. Wherby Princes may shew all offices vnto their
friends and confederates, and be sufficiently armed with
knowledge to resist the malice of their enemies or encounter
such as are held in iealousie.
         These are sent out by the mediation of the Councell
in most States, or by some of the principall. Of these Intelligencers
it is required,Pointes required in Intelligencers. first before their vndergoing
so dangerous an actiō, To speak singularly the tongues,
that may stand them in stead in that Countrey out of
which they must gather intelligence, and to imitate the

common gestures and behauiour of those nations, to
cloke their purposes the more artificially. Also to bee
well accōmodated of things needefull for their enterprises:
the which being variable and changeable according
to the alteration of States and times haue no certaine
rules. Only this, that such may safest trauell vnder
the shewes of those people which that State wherein
such must trauel to get intelligence hath the least ielousie
of, and are in good friendshippe. Lastly, to keepe the
order and manner of their enterprise so secret, as that
those which send out such shall not know the plot of all
things if so be the same be deuised by the Intelligencers
themselues, which is euer least dangerous. Moreouer
it is required of such to enure themselues to endure the
accidentes of Sea or Land; as stormes, heate, colde, excesse
of meates and drinkes, sickenesse, much riotte of
speech, simplicitie and such like. And in a word whether
abroad, or at home, let such be carefull they be not
discouered for Intelligencers or had in ouermuch iealousie,
but so warily demeane themselues that they may
aswell secure their own persons as benefite the State by
their intelligence.
         There is an other kinde of Intelligencers,Base Intelligencers. (but base
in respect of the former, by reason they assume a libertie
to say what they list) who are inquisitors or diuers
into the behauiours and affections of men belonging to
a State, the carriages of whom are verie insupportable;
oftentimes exercising any libertie and licentiousnesse
to prie into the hearts of men to know how such stand
affected. But being also necessarie euils in a State, I
would counsaile such as vnhappily shall haue to deale
with this packe of Muches not so fauourablie to suffer

them to raile vpon the Nobilitie of this Land and discouer
faults in the State, to blaspheme and dishonor the
Maiestie of God and of their Prince but rather to coniure
such so, as neuer afterwardes they shall delight in
that humorous-carnall-tempting and diuellish profession.
         The other sort,Men of warre. which likewise by the Princes or States
fauour are made Trauellers, are men of warre or souldiers,
seruing on the Land or Sea; whether these be sent to
serue vnder other Princes or haue authority committed
vnto them to make warre themselues. Now considering
these are either Commanders or common Souldiers,
there ought to be a distinct consideration. As
touching the first, though wee might considerately enough
leaue them out heere, being men of action and
experiēce,Three generall offices of men of warre. To be prouident and faithfull. yet we obserue three general offices of these:
First, ere they vndertake their iournie, to be accōmodated
with euerie thing necessarie, both for men, munitiō,
victuals and monie, which being the sinewes of euerie
enterprise shall preuaile greatly. And in case that any be
sent to serue vnder other Princes, it is a thing most requirable,
for the honour of their Prince and Country
and of themselues, to be much curious that euerie souldier
be seemely apparelled,Not to exceed Commission. and orderly sorted with
men and armes, and other things necessarie, and to be
faithfull vnto their Soueraigne. Secondly, let euery one
take heede hee goe not beyond his Commission, but
rather in case of his absolute authoritie streighten his
owne power, neuer presuming vpon the fauour of the
Prince or State that sendeth such an one foorth. For
though the same sometimes may sort to a happie end,
yet the encroching on the prerogatiue royall is reprouable,

and without reward, though so aduantagious for
ones Prince, and Countrie. And as it is the cheefest
point of a Commaunder to obserue good discipline
to aduance euerie enterprise and designe▪ so especially
in case of seruing vnder forreine Princes and powers,
let such be blamelesse and irreproueable: accomplishing
moreouer with resolution and discretion whatsoeuer
is committed to the charge of such, nothing attempting
vpon discretion without commaundement
of the Prince himselfe vnder whom such serue. And
that such be not lauish in rewarding with honour, or
too seuere in punishing offenders beyond the discipline
then exercised. The third and last consisteth in the
making true and diligent relation of euerie accident,To make true and diligent relation.
vnto the Prince to whome such belong. VVee shall
not neede to dilate on these, they are so common.
Nowe as concerning the common souldier in this
place of Non Voluntarie trauellers, let it only be exacted
of him, To be obedient to the discipline prescribed vnto
him, to esteeme of his armes as the cognisance of
a souldier; and neuer to be tainted with mutinie or
murmuring: For such do debarre themselues euermore
afterwarde of bearing armes, or of the reputation of
Souldiers, though such may pretend great cause. Of other
things let it be sought for in the voluntarie Trauellers.
         It nowe remaines wee touch vpon those that Inuoluntarily
are made Trauailers,Inuoluntaries vpon displeasure! by the displeasure conceaued
by the Prince, and by offence committed against
the law. Those that haue trespassed against
the lawe, although in other States in times past
they were great personages, as others that lay open to

such punishments, yet here in England are men of no
accompt or reckening: such as being incorrigible persons,
good for nothing, euill members, are for euer made
proscripts, and turned from the tuition of their naturall
friends and Countrie, to liue as runnagates in the wide
world.Banished persons of two sorts. But as concerning such as stand banished by
displeasure and prerogatiue royal of the Prince, they are
of two sorts. The first of such are onely for breach of
Lawes in Court banished from the Court, and confined
to approche no neerer than so many miles, for a certaine
space: these are not to our purpose. The other
is of such as the Prince vppon iust indignation banisheth
the Land for a time certaine or not; wherby such
are forced to trauell, and are of the Gentrie or Nobilitie
alwayes, of whom the Prince hath a greater respect,
then of the Commons that sustaine all punishments in
their times according to the Lawes. Of whome these
Offices are exacted; First,Their offices in trauaile. not to make shew of discontentednesse
other then sorrow for the offence done. Secondly,
to depart the Land, within the time limited.
Thirdly, not to trauaile into their Princes enemies
Coūtries, or into the Coūtries of miscreants & Infidels,
there to make their aboade; (for the one is a breach of
Religion, the other of allegeaunce and duetie to their
Prince, Soueraigne and Countrie: which yet remaine
to such so, during life) either for that they may obtaine
fauour to be recalled, or by decease of the Prince that
banished them in speciall cases of displeasure be freed
to returne from banishment: the benefite whereof they
may peraduenture lose if such shal be obserued to spend
their times in the enemies Countrie or keepe much familiaritie
with them. So is it to those that trauaile to

Pagans and Infidels, who although they may be friends
with their Prince, yet the office of banished trauellers
carrying the badge of Gods displeasure also vpon them
may not doe euerie thing that the policie of an Estate
shall permit: but in particular let them carrie themselues
so, as God their high Prince, who hath a more speciall
hand ouer such then ordinarie may be serued also and
appeased by obeysance to his word, which restraineth all
from voluntary fellowshippe with vnbeleeuers and vngodly
persons; much more to haue such a communitie
with them as being left to their choice they seeke rather
after such then the godly, & as it were indenizen themselues
into their life, Religion and conuersation. Lastly,
that wheresoeuer these shall remaine, let them carrie
themselues so discreetly during their perigrination, that
they may procure themselues to regaine their Princes
fauour to restore them. And also when such shall so
fortunately be recalled, to behaue themselues like newe
creatures and subiects, abandoning all reprouable actions
that draw downe sodainely GODS displeasure,
& consequently the like or greater iudgements. Thus
briefly may we conclude the first ranke of Regular and
lawfull Trauailers. The second followeth.
         2 Which are also of the Crue of Inuoluntaries:Such as trauaile for Religion and conscience sake.
being moued to traueil for the maintenance only and
preseruation of their Religion, which vppon assured
grounds they know to be the true and only sauing profession
whereby they serue God aright according to
his word, and prepare themselues for a more diuine &
excellent mansion then can be found or conceipted
heere on earth: the which thing may, of all other things
in the world held in estimation, prescribe against and

free them from the opposition of lawes humane, and
their allegeance; in such sort that whether men trauell
without commission or licence of the Prince and State
to whom they belong, or whether contrarie to the expresse
cōmandemēt of the State,In what cases their trauaile is warrantable. their callings are iustifiable
& honorable without the titles of fugitiues or rebels;
so such demeane themselues, in sort according to
godlines, & as good subiects, before they put themselues
to trauel, & during their perigrination. For if it be generally
held that faith is to be perswaded not compelled;
& that no man hath power of Religiō, seeing that it proceedes
from the minde and will, the libertie whereof resteth
in the hands of God only, to dispose of: then of all
men those are most free that ground their Religion vpō
the word of God, which only is able to enfranchise and
giue an assured hope of standing, vnto the sincere professors
thereof; making mens actions holy and warrantable
euerie where. Hence, the subiects of a nation that
persecuteth the Gospell of Christ, & establisheth lawes
derogatorie from the true worship of God cōmanded
onely in the holy scriptures, haue their Supersedeas authenticall.
For which cause hath God, least his seruants
should make shipwracke of their faith and conscience,
whom he hath not fitted to be Martyrs, made a way in
the hearts of Princes that they may trauell into other
Nations peaceably, and there abide till the Lord shall
remooue the rodde of persecution from his Church.
Of which wee haue singular testimonies both in the
dayes of Queene Marie; and contrariewise in the blessed
reigne of Queene ELIZABETH: Who
granted to seuerall Nations within her Dominions
freely to exercise their Religion, and that in distinct

formes, in their seuerall tongues, for the better entertainement
of their consciences. Nowe to auoyde the
inconueniences of this libertie, that many vpon blinde
zeale and offended consciences may pretend; such Trauailers
must obserue these Rules following, or the like.
First,Their duties before trauell. that all subiects before they enterprise trauaile in
this kind are to consider with themselues, whether there
be not some other licentious affectes that spurre them
forward. For,No licentious humor may presse these forth. though men vpon other grounds of affectes
haue libertie to trauaile by licence or flight, yet is
their iournying altogether displeasing to God and disparageable
with men: much more in the case of religiō.
For it is made changeable and turneth soone into hypocrisie.
Secondly,Right Religiō▪ such are to ponder well whether the
Religiō, which they professe and would gladly exercise,
be that which by Christ was instituted and by his Prophets
and Apostles; contained in the Canonicall scriptures:
wherein all ceremoniall and olde blind sacrificing
worshippe, all humane traditions that consent not with
the faith and to edification; all idolatrie and politicall
gouernement that derogateth from GODS
glorie, is forbiden, as thinges damnable. From
hence are all perigrinations and pilgrimages to any
place for the performance of vowes, or sacrificings
for sinnes, impious and vaine. Thirdly,
howbeit, for the nourishment of that true and
righte Religion, men maye bee iustly mooued to
trauaile, yet it is the office of all so trauailing to
weighe and consider with themselues, first, whether
the same bee not professed alreadie in their Countrie,Toleration of Religion.
or libertie permitted for such to exercise the same.
         
            
For, if there be an exercise thereof there, or a toleratiō
though in a priuate sort, a subiect only for this ought
not to trauell nor forsake his owne Land, Countrie, parents,
brethren, and that Church whereof he is a member,
for any other vaine perswasion or fancie▪ Fourthly,
if so be ther be neither publike exercise not priuate toleration;
and in case ther bee Lawes prohibitiue for
trauelling,To sue for licence of the Magistrate. it is the dutie of euerie subiect to mooue
the Prince or Magistrare, to whom authoritie is comitted,
to grant licence: the which if it can not bee obtained
it is better to venture flight and shunne persecution
then to abide it; vnlesse such an one can find in his hart
the motions of strength and courage to suffer persecution
for the truth of the Gospell, without wauering. Yet
of the two it is better to flie from persecution, then being
come into it, to saint, & so leaue their hope & faith
in ieopardie. Lastly, let not such stand indifferent whether
they goe, so they may be prouided for: for if there
be any choice, the best is euermore to be elected. And
therfore considering in outward shew that is best where
the Gospell is flourishing,What Countries are best for these to trauaile in. Of three, one free from danger. yet in other cases dāgerous;
I presuppose three kind of places to trauaile into for this
kinde of people, and only one free from danger. The
first, a State which is enemie to their Countrie. The
second, a State neerely linked in many respects to their
Countrie. The third, a State, which is indifferent: I
meane such a State as is neither fast friend, nor apparant
enimie. To peece out our discouse about these
it is needelesse, being apparant vnto all men, that the
newter or free state is least dāgerous to be trauailed into
for this kind of people. Their offices now in trauaile
offer themselues. First,Their offices in trauaile. considering they are now become

separates from the world, their courses must be so
much the more spirituall, that the prouident hand of
God may not be remooued from them, and that hee
may receaue them as members of his Church into fauour
againe.To serue God sincerely. Wherefore let them serue God truely in
those places wherein they shall be dispersed; that they
may cause euerie nation fearing God to tender their
estates and to relieue their necessities. Secondly, let
them demeane themselues euerie one according to his
estate and abilitie answerable to the Lawes & customes
of those places wherein they shall happily abide,To obey the lawes and discipline. that
no hatred or mislike befall on such. And in case the
number of those shall be so great as to make a congregatiō
by themselues, hauing humbly obtained the same
of the Prince or Magistrate in a place conuenient, it behoueth
such a Congregation to institute that Order of
discipline which may best sort with the Magistrats pleasure:
that no iarres or dissension arise therein: or other
policie be established then that which consenteth with
other godly Churches, vnlesse it shall be left vnto their
owne election to sample their discipline after the most
reformed and esteemed Churches:Not to change the discipline, being once Regular. about which if controuersie
arise, let the appointment thereof be referred
to the Magistrate or Prince of the State. And in case the
same be thus once considerately established, wherein
no iust offence to any may arise (though in euerie politicke
bodie there are some weake members that are
scandaled at things indifferent) the same ought to bee
continued without alteration; least dissension and displeasure
creep in, a thing most displeasing in the church
of God; and to strangers, in a strange Nation most dangerous.
But in case the numbers of such be so small, and

the place will not permit a distinct Church, then ought
such to be conformable vnto the discipline of that place,
auoyding also all publike and priuate mislike of the
discipline, or gouernement there vsed. Ad though
that State retaine in their policie many things,In discipline the doctrine not the policy is to be sought after. which
were better left out, then commaunded, yet strangers
are to followe the doctrine and not externall things,
as Ceremonies and orders. For, the intermeddling
therewith sauoureth not of Christianitie and knowledge.
         Thirdly, in case such be depriued of maintenance,Not to refuse any honest trad to liue by.
or if the custome of that place wherein they liue doe
accompt it requisite, let euerie one in his calling bend
himselfe to some honest Science or mechanicall trade,
that they may not only get their liuings honestly, but
may bee also reputed good members of that Common
Weale. Moreouer,No excesse to be discouered. if wealth abound, let not
such spend that lauishly,wantonly, or carelesly.
For that benefiteth not any; much lesse strangers, in
a strange Nation, especiall the religious, the same being
a scandall to their profession.
         So in matters and affaires of the ciuill State,No Diuers into the politicke gouernement or secrets. let them
not entermeddle nor be curious searchers into the secrets
therof. For, being placed in a State only for zeale
of Religion, they must giue continuall shew of vertue,
and shunne euerie thing that may breed iealousie; least
that State into which they are receiued hold them rather
for Spies, then for Religious professors. Neither
let such bee noted for fayneants and idle persons:
for such corrupt an Estate.Neuer to bee noted for idle persons. And let them bee
euer kinde and respectiue to the people with whome
they are suffered to liue amongst; rather sufferers of

iniuries then offerers of any wrong to them; neuer accepting
Duello, but by the permission of the Magistrate
for capitall wrong. Lastly, that thorough no
perswasion of their friends at home,Not trecherous to their owne Prince or Countrie. or of enemies abroad,
or of their owne tempting affections, they
goe about treacherously, or rebelliously, to practise or
rise against their natiue Soueraigne, in any sort, howe
vniust or vngodly soeuer their Prince be: but rather
seeke vnto God to turne his heart, and to giue a peaceable
returne home vnto them.
         The last point we will briefly handle concerning
their offices when they happily shal be recalled,Their offices when they returne. or permitted
to returne, in two obseruations. First, that howsoeuer
the State stands affected, it being permitted to
them to haue libertie of conscience and priuate exercise
of Religion,Noe busie bodies or moouers of sedition. Not to attempt or consent vnto
any commotion, insurrection, or any such treasonable
action, but to carry loyall hearts towards the Prince
and State, not once publikely speaking or writing against
the Ecclesiastical policie, nor be strict and ouer-precise
in things externall and indifferent: but
carrie respect vnto the times, and late standing of
things; vsing all things to the glorie of God without
offence or breach of conscience. And considering
that there is of most things a ciuill and superfluous
vse, let such retaine the Ciuill, and construe
euerie thing rather to the best and to edification,
then to preiudice the conscience of one another,
leauing the superstitious vseage to those that vppon
good knowledge doe vse thē. That other is the sociable
& peaceable carriage of euerie one to his neighbour,To vse a godly and quiet conuersation.
seeking al occasiōs to encrease loue and mutul societie.

As concerning other things required in Trauellers,Of Volūtaries▪ let
it be sough for in the Voluntarie trauellers which now
offer themselues to be discoursed on, being the proper
subiect of our point in hand.
         3 Before wee enter into the listes of this matter,The moouers of Voluntaries. The pleasure of parents.
there are some things considerable: for there be some
that go vnder the name of voluntarie trauellers moued
out of their parents pleasure and will. The callings of
which may seeme equally lawfull no doubte, so their
parents performe their offices and haue them well guided
& instructed, in the interim of their iourny (for trauell
to some bodies are as new birthes; that beare them,
of dull mindes and sowre, good quicke and sweete conuersing
spirits and inclinations: yea amendeth many
imperfections of nature); so as the lawfulnesse of the
parents ende and purpose haue a lawfull pretence also.
Thus may the efficient and finall causes come foule one
of another:The finall and efficient moouing causes considered. for the clearing of which confusion, I iudge
it needefull to consider a few words of the endes in generall;
that when the particular kindes of trauailers
shall be mentioned, their endes by implication may appeare.
Of endes lawfull,Two lawfull final moouers. there are two heades: one
Prime and principal; the other Congruent and Secondarie.
         The prime is diuine and spirituall,The prime. That afterwards
we may leade a more quiet, contented and peaceable
life, to the honor and glorie of God, with knowledge
and vnderstanding. And this no doubt ought to bee
the first marke, for euerie man to shoote at in this life,
that by doing the reuealed will of God, euerie one may
seek vnto himselfe the assurance of heauenly happinesse,
which is incomprehensible and eternall. That other,

Congruent and Secondarie, is agreeable also and
fitting the calling of euerie particular;The secondarie is duple. being of two
sorts: Publike or Priuate. The Publike is most honorable,
and should stirre vp euerie man with delight to
vndertake trauaile for the good of ones Countrie.
Neither is the Priuate discommendable, considering
it giueth satisfaction or at the least sufficiencie to liue
well and happily according to the humor of the world,
whereby it may be apparant that the motiues and ends
of some are all one.
         Moreouer, seeing it may be doubted whether all
persons may be included vnder the third ranke of Regular
Trauellers: and also whether all times be fitting
for these to vndertake Trauaile: And lastly, whether
euery age be congruent with these: let vs in order cleare
these three points. To the first, I obserue three Opposers:
to wit Nature, which prohibiteth Infants and decrepit
persons, whose defect of vnderstanding and doting
age pleadeth insufficiencie. Imperfection, others
as fooles, madde men and furious persons whose disabilities
of minde are such as no hope can be expected
for the one or other. Lastly, the Sex in most Countries
prohibiteth women, who are rather for the house
then the fielde; and to remaine at home, then trauaile
into other Nations, but in speciall cases. As touching
the second,What times are fit to trauaile in. what times are fittest for the voluntarie trauellers
to goe in, we must obserue a duple season, either
of their owne Countrie or of those whereinto
they would trauaile. Touching the first, let none trauaile
at those times when their Countrey is engaged
with Ciuill, or expecteth warres. For, to leaue the
same in time of necessitie, were vnnaturall and dangerous:

in the one case it being disparageable, to leaue
the Countrie when enemies inuade the same; in the other
case it may proue perilous to such, many sundrie
wayes. And therfore that time is best, whē ones Countrie
is in peace and tranquilitie.
         Touching the second, that the seasons also of such
Countries where into such trauaile ought to be regarded,
it belongeth to euery particular to make obseruance,
When he may reape most profit thereby
in the shortest time: namely the souldier when there are
warres: the Ciuilian or Lawyer, when great matters are
debated in Parliaments, Vniuersities or disputations,
concerning points of equitie, prerogatiue, iurisdiction
and such like: The Diuine, when any Generall or Nationall
Councel is heald touching their profession: The
Mechanicke, when such and such Artes and trades doe
singularly florish &c. Yet euerie man so trauailing must
take heede, how he goe into a Countrie that is iealous
of his Prince, and subiects; which chaunceth euermore
when Princes are enimies or when they haue
intestine warres and factions that vse any policie to aduantage
their partie.
         Now the third and last is,What age is meetest to trauaile in. whether any age be congruent
for these voluntaries. This is a harde thing to
resolue vpon; for there may be reasons on both sides,
that commend youth, and other reasons that preferre
the middle age. But seeing the reasons for youth profit
but in speciall cases and but few persons: I rather insist
vpon the middle age. For, the nonage of men is vncapable
either to apprehend or comprehend things important,
for the State of which they are, or for thēselues:
Or else transported with many turbulent affections that

hinder their quiet ingenious vnderstādings, and rather
gather corruption thē commendablenesse, which ouerwaigh
such good parts as they happily in longe time
with paines haue collected. Wherefore the Divine
Plato by implication forbade men to trauell in this kind
till they came to fortie yeares of age. But our age and
climate now perfecteth sooner: and therefore wee will
take the meaning of his wordes, which implyeth thus
much; That age to be fittest for trauaile in which a man
in shortest time may make most profitte, and bee in
least daunger to be corrupted, by his owne swaying
affections, or by the stie perswasions of others: The
which chāceth in our Climate after twentie fiue yeres
in most bodies; and therefore the Phylosopher addeth,
Such might trauell till 50 yeares. By which words I collect
two things: one, that men shold not make too short
a returne, and so be little bettred by their trauaile. The
other that when men grow aged and declining, trauailing
shold be left off (considering that age is laboursom
enough without trauaile, and it argueth incōsideratnes)
but in speciall cases. So as the middle age frō thirtie or
therabouts vnto fortie is the most gathering, for such as
will be publike members of a Common-weale, to learne
obserue and collect so many things as are requireable
in all worthy and compleat Trauailers. Nowe to our
point in hand: the persons thus voluntarily prest out are
either of the Nobilitie or of the Commons.These voluntaries are Nobles or Commons. The nobles either make profession or not. The Nobilitie
are either general or speciall. The Nobilitie general
are such as haue no profession singular: The speciall are
such as before trauel make some professiō wherof I cōceaue
fower distinct kinds: Diuines, Souldiers,Foure notable professions. Ciuill
Lawers, Physitiās; of which we will cōsider after we haue
grated vpō the Cōmons: who are either Mechanicks or Marchants.
         
            
The Marchants are of two sorts here meant,Two rankes of Marchants. such as are
knowen to the State, and such as goe vnder the name of
warre, vnknown to the State otherwise then by letters
of marke and permission: who are chiefly to take heed
they transgresse not the boundes of their Commission.
And therefore before they trauaile by Sea,Men of warre & their offices. let them
learne well, who may be made prises▪ and what; east the
State be troubled for the abuse of such, and they themselues
shent and lose their voiage. Moreouer, let them
be carefull to set downe in their seuerall Sea Charts, euerie
thing of speciall note; as Countries, Hauens,
Creekes, Iles, Rockes, Gulfes, Shooles, Sands, Shelues
and such like: whereby others after them may make vse
thereof, to the profit of the Common-weale. And
when these shall returne, to make a true relation (if they
be demaunded) of euerie accident during their voyage,
and of such aduertisements as may stand the Sate in
vse, of which they are.
         But those other knowen Marchants, for that their
Trauailes are knowen to be profitable, and of honest
esteeme, they haue speciall priuiledges which to no other
voluntarie Trauailer chanceth; namely to passe
and repasse with safe conduct, themselues and their
substances, vnlesse in times of warre, &c. In regarde
whereof they are tyed vnto these duties; First,The duties of marchants. First, by a
prudent, deligent, and faithfull care to obserue by what
things the State may be most benefited; and to haue
perseuerance where such Marchandize that the State
most vseth and desireth may be had with greatest ease,To accommodate their country with good and most needfull thinges.
least charge, and without inconuenience to his Countrey:
Where there may be a likelihoode of continuance
without mislike of their Princes, whose affaires

are much managed by Marchants. And though the
disposition of these things belongs to the Prince, yet
the disquisition appertaineth to the calling of Marchants;
who, when they haue excogitated a thing to
the benefit of the State by Marchandize or new trades,
referre the discussion to the Counsaile of the Prince
whether the same be aduantagious or no. Secondly,
let them in any case not transport any thing prohibited;Neuer to transport thinges prohibited.
or vnto their Countries enemies, nor suffer
their Factors to send ouer such as may be displeasing or
vnprofitable to their Prince, Lawes, or Countrie.
Thirdly,To conceale the secrets of their Princes states. let all of this kinde conceale the secrets and
outward state of their Countrie with faithfulnesse and
respect: and be verie circumspect to prie into the secrets
of other Countries where they come, least they
be held for spies and no Marchants; a thing most dangerous
to those people.
         Lastly, forasmuch as most of this kinde of Trauailers
are of singular iudgement and vnderstanding, to
make prudent obseruation of things beneficiall to the
State: Let thē if so they be demanded relate how things
stand abroad, and in case they know any thing of moment
the concealement whereof may incommodate
the State, it is their duetie to discouer the same when
they retourne, with the greatest secrecie and speed vnto
such as are knowne to bee priuie Councellers, and to
none other. For, oftentimes passing thorough many
mouthes, the importances of good newes and intelligence
are much impaired.
         The other sort of the Commons,Mechanicke trauailers. to witte, Mechanickes
(whose trauaile may also accommodate an
Estate with many things to set the poorer sort to worke

and as it were plant in their Countrie the cōmodities &
peculiar trades of other nations) now resteth to behādled.
The chiefe trades wherof are by Marchāts brought
for the most part into States, and by them ordered till
long vse disperse thē throughout, to the benefit generall.
Now, in regard with vs there are many Artes, not in that
perfection as in other Coūtries, or such as the rarer sort
of those be, which are set vp and vpheld by strangers to
the preiudice of the Realme (yet not so much as in case
there were none at all) it is a thing verie requisite for
these kind of Trauellers and for the State, in case they
cannot be attained vnto at home. Moreouer we see in other
Countries few, apprentises, aboue three yeares for
one trade; which giueth much encouragement to such
as couet the same. And there is nothing more beneficiall
for a State to vphold the same then the vsing of these
Occupations and trades which set many hands to worke
and haue many dependants. Wherefore in times past
there were reckoned but vii. Mechanicke Artes, because
a State could not want either, and in regard they are the
generall heads vpon which all other depend. Hence in
our State husbandrie and Clothing are the nerues of the
weale publike, the failing whereof must needs turne the
cote of the State. Insomuch as it is a hard matter to discerne
whether Woll or Corne accōmodate this State
more: though expresly Tillage carrie the greater sway
then breeding of Sheepe and grasing. But to our purpose.
         Let such trauailers first, hauing libertie to trauaile,The offices of Mechanickes in iourneying. suruey
the best places, where those Arts are to be learned;
as in Germanie all manner of Formers, Potters or figulists
are to be found in perfection. In Italy Architecture,

Limming, Painting, Engrauing, Imagerie, Textorie, and
weauing, and Artes ingenious may be learned. So according
to euerie Countries seuerall commodities seuerall
and peculiar Artes do flourish. Lastly, let them
spend their times so diligently as commoditie and estimation
be their reward.
         The Nobilitie as was said were generall or speciall.The consideration of the foure notable professions in noble trauelers
The special were of fower sorts, Diuines, Souldiers, Ciuil
Lawyers, & Physiciās: which are so called special Trauailers
not in regard such be more excellent or honorable
thē others, but for that such prescribe vnto thē a speciall
thing to be attaind vnto as wel for perfectiō as satisfactiō.
Of these in order. First, the Diuines be such as make profession
of Diuinitie outwardly in the State, wherby they
may be imployed in the Ministrie and seruice of God.
And although all men must account it a chiefe honour
vnto them contemplatiuely to make profession thereof:Diuines, inhibited trauaile but in speciall cases.
yet such may not trauaile but in speciall cases as before
hath been alleadged, on the pretence of knowledge; the
same being to be attained vnto within their own Countrie:
wheras the outward professors, that haue the calling
of Ministers, haue in some cases better warrant.
         Howbeit, by our pofitiue law Clearkes are forbid to
trauaile, for this pretence. For in case such may be satisfied
and endoctrined in the points they doubt of within
their owne Princes Dominions, of godly and learned
professors, I see not how their Trauailes can be lawfull.
But in case where the Gospel and truth is not preached,
I iudge it a most happy thing for any whosoeuer to serch
the word in other nations:The person of a subiect belongs cheifely to the Princes disposition. but not without licence of the
State. For no man ought to dispose of himselfe so, as his
Prince should lose the benefit of his person, the which is

dispensable in the case of God onely and in case of persecution,
wherein God is interessed. Moreouer, it is
from the office of Ministers that haue the cure of soules,
to goe into voluntarie Trauaile, for any ordinarie pretense,
and leaue the same without a right good
shepheard; and in many cases not then, though he leaue
in his roome a carefull pastor. For, this function and
vocation is more to be respected then others, it being
singularly dedicated to the seruice of God.Foure lawfull pretenses of Diuines to trauaile. Then of
such Diuines as may trauaile we obserue foure pretenses:
two generall, and two speciall. The generall are
either of a generall Councell or Nationall:The generall Counsaile. or of some
famous Librarie. But in case such Councels bee not
compounded of worthie and knowen men, of learning
and iudgement & approued by the State whereof men
are, the profit will be so little as the pretence must cease.
So is it of the other generall pretence,A famous Librarie. namely the view
of some famous Librarie, which containeth such famous
printed bookes or manuscripts as faithfully discusse
of points not yet concluded, nor to bee had and
procured other where. For, in case by transscripts or
any assured collections men may attaine vnto the pith
of those points, this pretense should also cease. The
two pretences are either to haue conference with such
famous men, whose learning may satisfie & endoctrine;
or else with those naturall Iewes and Grecians whose
learning may for the furtherāce of those diuine tongues
giue much helpe to the vnderstanding of the Scriptures.
Yet if so the Gospell flourish already, in their owne
Countrie, and that there be learned men to bee reuerenced,
in all things to be doubted of; if such choose
rather to trauaile then to conferre, and aske to be resolued

of those their Countriemen, the pretence of them
must also cease. For, it is a contempt to the Church
whereof they are members, to trauaile for instruction,
when men may be well instructed at home without inconuenience,
especially where there are Vniuersities, &
publike professors of thē. It is needlesse to prescribe rules
for these in trauailing: for the most are sage and prudent
men; and therefore we will passe to the second sort: to
weet Ciuilians.
         Ciuile Lawyers haue a lawfull pretence,Ciuilians. so be it the
Ciuile Law be in request in the State whereof such are,
and cannot be attained in so singular a manner, as in
those Vniuersities that wholly consist therof, and where
that law flowrisheth most. And although the Law may
in some sort, by reading and conference in the Vniuersities,
be for Theorie and iudgement sufficiently gotten
in ones owne Countrie, yet the liuely expression and
Elocution thereof I iudge in other Nations for the
common vse may adorne counsaile in the best manner.
Wherefore as it is the office of Diuines aboue all things
to take heed in their trauaile they be not corrupted with
false doctrine,The offices of Diuines and Ciuilians. wherwith other people of other Nations
striue to tempt Schollers at this day: so let it be the first
office of these Ciuilians (men for the most part indued
with great vnderstanding & faculties) to be well grounded
in their Religion before, and consequently faithfull,To be settled and stable in Religion.
secret & honest to their Coūtrie, hauing a vigdant eye,
that they be not misseled by the subtilties of other Nations,
& many of their vnsound positiōs in their law Canon,
frō the sinceritie of their Religiō & the Gospell: the
which shall adorne them when they returne, more then
all their learning and obseruations. For, by how much

men of wit and vnderstanding stand firme in the truth, &
puritie of Religion, by so much shal their learnings and
honesties be had in recommendation, with whom they
conuerse afterwards; the same in Trauailers voluntarie
being a rare matter. Moreouer,To be studious let them be careful to
make obseruance for the rights, customes, statutes, ordinances,
proclamations, decrees, particular lawes and priuiledges,
liberties & prerogatiues of places and persons
where happily they shal come. Lastly, whensoeuer they
trauaile into forreine States where there are Vniuersities
and where there are degrees to be taken,To take degrees, let them labour
to attaine to the same. For, to men of desert it is reputed
a dishonor, to returne without them, in case they freely
may be attained vnto. For, otherwise the pretence of their
trauaile wil in the mindes of men cease, the degree being
the Crowne of their vocatiō, which to professors is most
necessarie. For other things we referre them to such obseruations
as to the generall Voluntaries are prescribed,
afterwards. The Souldiers follow.
         The profession of these voluntarie Trauailers is armes
and warrefare,Souldiers. athing much approued of euerie Common
weale. And although none should so binde himself
to that vocation, as all his life time to liue by the same,
but rather in peace and tranquillitie afterwardes, yet the
pretence of young men & of able bodies, to endure hardnesse
for the aduancement of their Countries weale and
discipline, is honorable, carying a more sensible le liking of
the State thē the former two. And although, by reading,
conference and such like consideratiōs vpon other mens
experiences, many are made good Theoristes & Counsellers
in warre to direct orderly & warily before battel
or skirmish, yet no man can be a compleat soldier without

            tion, & almost continuall exercise in armes. For
w encounters chance, self-eye-seeing experience shal
be a readier preuentresse of accidēts & infinite occurrences
that chance, to assure the victorie.Two sorts of good Soldiers. Yet are there thus
two compleate kinds of Soldiers in their seuerall kindes;
Such as be experienced themselues & men of action: and
those whose singular contemplation on the experiences
of others, are able in meete time to giue good direction
and counsaile. For, as there are some whose experience
only haue made them learned to encounter actions and
accidēts, & in the incountring are right circumspect and
valorous, yet can not such in Counsaile giue the best direction,
for the generall encountering of inconueniences:
so there are others on the contrarie, whose prudent
care to prouide for euerie occurrence; that to the vnderstanding
at first and before action is represented, is such
as if euerie thing should fall out according to their deliberation,
no doubt would assure victorie:but, comming
to ioyne, faile on the sodaine what to resolue of. But
when the spectacles of the one are ioyned with the eyes
of the other, in that souldier doubtlesse compleatnesse
and perfection dwelleth. For,as glasses artificiall,A Compleat Souldier. concording
with the nature of each sight, aide and preserue
much the sight of euerie eye; so Arte ioyned
with experience, in warre especially, giueth an assurance
of perfection, aswell to preuent the worst, as to prouide
for the best, and that vppon an instant; which
beareth great swaie in battailes. Wherefore, in the
first place as for those that are minded to bee Trauailers
in this kind,The first point of learning in a Souldier. they had need to learn the grounds
of the Arte of warre before hand, that such may make
the best vse of their times; namely, Arithmeticke,

Geometrie and other Mathematicke sciences, that may
happily traine them vp to more iudgement in one yeare
(if so they also passe some time in historie) then others in
fiue. Secondly, being thus prepared, let them consider
with themselues that no one discontentment wage them
forwarde,The second point of consideration. but to enable thēselues for to do their Countrie
good, and Prince seruice, when occasion shall bee
profered. For, such as go otherwise cannot be assured
of Gods protection, blessing or fauour: for want wherof
we see how vainly the greater part of these Trauellers
spend their times. Thirdly,The third, they are to ponder whether
at such time as they would trauaile, their Prince and
Countrie shall not neede to imploy their seruice either
at home or abroad: For, in such cases it cannot but argue
vanitie to trauaile, when as their Prince or Countrie
shall haue speciall vse of them. Fourthly, to accustome
themselues to endure extreamities,The fourth. of heate and cold, of
paines of body and minde, of bodily trauaile in swift
and slowe motions, and to be able to manage euery sort
of armes offensiue or defensiue vsed on horsebacke or on
foote:that, when such shal come to serue in the warres of
any Prince, estimation attend on them. For, none can be
iustly reputed for his particular a cōpleat soldier in action,
but he that is able to serue in all attempts in any kind
of seruice with iudgement and resolution.The fift. Fiftly, let such
bend their trauels into those Coūtries, either wher their
Prince maketh war or fauoreth; or go vnder the conduct
of such Princes, as are neerest friends vnto their Prince &
Countrie. For, it is vnseemely that any should choose to
serue rather vnder strangers then friends. Lastly, to this
must be annexed, that such trauaile for their greater benefit
into those Countries where best seruice and discipline

is to be learned:What maketh a good soldier. for that maketh a Soldier to be
vnder good discipline & to see good seruice; which is in
duple respect, either of the enemie against whom, or in
the Countrie wherein such serue. The enemie against
whō men serue, doth aduāce the seruice if he be stirring,
& alwayes plotting of some matter against his enemies,
whether hee keepe the fielde or lie in Garrison: In lie
sort may the seruice be bettered by those vnder whom
men serue.A triple kind of seruice, to perfect souldiers. The consideration of the Countrie is triple,
that maketh the seruice good, which in the ende
shall perfect a Souldier: the first is, where the Countrie
is champaine, & that either of Moūtains or of Valleyes:
the seruice wherein makes men alwayes to stand vpon
their guard, and to be well accompanied in euerie
designe. The second in couert Countries, marishie
and boggie; which are the aptest for stratagemes and
surprizes, making men watchfull & prouident euermore
to suspect the worst, wheresoeuer they come. The third
and last, are the fortifications of Countries, or those
Countries that stand most vpon them, which employ
the spirits and ingenious parts of Souldiers, after an extraordinarie
manner.
         The first Nauarre and Sauoy are apt for, and the Lowe
Countries that bee wasted: The seconde, Ireland
will furnish men with: And, in the worlde for the
third, a man cannot haue better experience then in
the Lowe Countries. So as when such Trauailers haue
gotten experience in one, if they desire perfection, let
them trauaile for the other: For in few Countries & wars
shall men finde all.
         Then,Their duties in seruice. being arriued into the Armie or Garrison and
entred into the seruice, first, with great diligence euerie 
            
thing of speciall make contained either in discipline of
seruice ought to be obserued: and for euerie mans better
vnderstanding, let them discourse thereof and question.
 Secondly, let such be verie studious to be obserue all lawes
and ordinances of that discipline; as also to obey euerie
speciall Commandement of their Cōmanders: for them
consisteth the honor of a soldier. And though the disciplin
permit much libertie of idlenes, (wherby many are
entised to gaming, vnholy & vnprofitable exercises). Let
such, being strangers especially, abstain frō those childish
recreations, and either confer about things they are ignorant
of, or reade such books of warre & historie, that may
sharpen and giue knowledge continually to them; or
with company follow the managing of Armes offensiue
or defensiue, wherin men cannot be too skilful: or the exercise
of vaulting, leaping, swimming, darting, shooting,
& such other of the arme as gather strength & nimblenes
 to the body, which in wars are of no small proofe. Thirdly,
aboue all things let strangers feare to motimie, or accept
of quarrels, but rather put vp iniuries then offer any.
For there is a ciuill and honorable redresse of wrongs, in
war, to be expected from the General, Mareschall, & Cōmanders
of the Armie, whose sentence ought to be expected
in all things of the same nature, yea in accepting of
Combates for the honor of ones Prince and Countrie against
the enemies, if occasion be offered.
         Moreouer, let such take heede, they neuer offer to accept
of Combate,Note. for the honour of another Nation, if
any of the same serue in the same place: for that is an iniurie
 to that Nation. Fourthly, as none may serue vnder
infidels, in case there be wars in Christendom: and as none
may go and serue vnder such as are doubtfull friends vnto

their Countrie or Enimies; so are all to be carefull to
serue, where the right is most apparant, and where the
Gospell is preached in the armie, that God may giue thē
best successe So in case there be no wars in Christēdom,
let such trauaile to other nations (after licence obtained
of their Prince) and seeke seruice of such Princes that
neither warre against Christians, nor haue an ill quarrell
in hand. For, as it is a shame for any to take part with enemies
or with infidels against ones own Coūtrie: so it is
requisite on the other side that they serue in those wars
amongst infidels, whose cause and quarrel is iust & good
in the sight of men. Lastly, let all those who will make 
their pretence good in the opinion of men, carry themselues
so strictly in these and other common duties pertaining
to souldiers, as that they make not profession
thereof, but to establish peace and tranquillitie, when
happily they shal returne home to their Countrie, as
good Bees with wax and honey, to their hiue of the
Common-weale, and demeane themselues so in times
of peace, as they giue ensample to gowned men, of
peaceable and orderly liuing; neither in riot nor in ambition,
or pride, which keepe reuell roupt in the dereigled
crue of Trauailers. Now, as concerning the last order
of Voluntarie speciall Trauailers: namely of Physicians.
         By the word Physician, is meant first such as haue the
lawfull calling;Physicians. and either haue alreadie or intende to
take degrees, that they may giue countenance to their
knowledge. Moreouer, by the name I conceit such as
haue the facultie, and naturall knowledge of euerie
thing, concerning diseases or wounds in the bodie or
minde of man.
         
            
For,Two knowledges requireable in Physicians. the remedying of all which, there are two things
requirable; namely, the simple knowledge of euerie liuing
and inanimate thing, whether of Mineralls, Vegetables,
sensible Animalles, or of man and the experience
how each of these in seuerall Countries and bodies
haue their certaine operations. And seeing without
doubt God hath planted, in the world, meanes (either of
simples or of Compounds) to remedie any sickenesse or
cure any wound, although the knowledge or meanes be
not alwaies blessed; wee may collect the lawfulnesse of
Physiciās trauaile also. And though God haue fitted euerie
Climate and Countrie with meanes to relieue the
common distresses and grieueances of men, yet wee see
for want of knowledge in Physicians either how to vse
the simples in their owne Countries or how to compound
them aright according to the Dose of euery body
natural, they are enforced to search into other Countries
for aide.
         For, though we haue, as other Countries, many singular
things to remedie the decay or disquiets of nature:
yet seeing the simples of other Countries, for some particular
bodies and griefes, are more naturall then many
compounds of our own, & the skil is lesse to apply them,
why shold not necessitie make Physicians trauel for knowledge
as the old wife for neede. We see the artificiall Bezar
stone to be lesse profitable for some bodies then the
natural; the fained Sanguis Draconis thē the right which
is brought frō Africa: & so of such like adulterous resemblāces,
which necessitie, & mens gains haue laboured &
arted. In the Vniuersities of learned men, that science,
and store of bookes of all things in the world for simples
and compoundes according to their natures,

and vertues are better described then any one by his own
trauaile can amend: (For in Trauaile there must necessarily
bee much time spent, and little practise had at
home: and practise is no doubt the best thing that maketh
a good Physician) neuerthelesse for some diseases
a man shall happily learne more by trauaile, then by all
these at home.
         For,The studie of Physicians. there are many of our capitall diseases easily cured
in other Countries. Now then, hee that will make
good of his pretence, must labour into the grounds of
Astronomie and Astrologie, as of proportiō. For, without
these, such wander without a guide in the wildernes
of nature. Moreouer, during their trauaile (after licence
obtained) let them make vse of euerie thing they shall
see; aswell of things knowne as of the vnknowne. For
the difference of Climates and soyles, alter much the nature
of euerie thing.
         In like sort must such obserue the persons in euerie
Countrie,Common and accidentall diseases, so particularly as they can, and marke their
common and accidentall diseases, & to take knowledge
of their cures. So if there be any speciall Bathes, Waters,
Pooles, Spawes, or Springs, the operation
whereof may cure any maladie, to learne their vertues.
         And lastly to frequent the most famous places and
companies of learned men, whereby such may better
their knowledge, & increase their discourse: which is no
small thing, in a Physician, to be well mannered, ciuill,
wittie, and pleasant, and of able disposition to delight his
patiēts by discourse. Moreouer, if such light vpō simples,
which are either of a strāge nature or that excell ours, let
them bee carefull to transplant them; hauing a care

to the soile, climate, and growing of such, that Arte
here may repaire the naturall defect of the Countrey.
But considering many, when they returne home, are
tainted with the humor of most trauailers, namely selfe
conceipt,The vertue of Physicians. and better thinking of themselues then is conuenient,
let them be as respectiue to relieue the poore &
the needie as the rich. For many Physicians will not go
out of the doores to saue a poore mans life. Moreouer,
let them be carefull to administer noe desperate or vnknowen
thing vnto any: for such, as in the former case,
are no lesse then murtherers before God, if their patients
proue not well vnder them. Neither let couetousnes
ouer-rule them, as those Physicians and Surgeons
that dallie with mens bodies to get much monie:
but let euerie one accoumpt it his duetie to do good to
any. And in so doing they shall finde God their Physician
not only of their bodyes but of their soules: wheras
otherwise the saying of our Nation may be applyed
fitly vnto them, Physicians cure your selues. Thus farre
of the speciall Voluntarie Trauailers.
         The ende of the first part.
      
      
         
         
         
            Page 35. A. The second part, in part, abstracted.
            We haue described volūtary regular Trauailers to be Nobles & Commons: and the Nobles to be

                  1, Generall: of whom it is to bee considered what they are to vndergoe,

                        1, Before trauaile,

                              1, To put on the pretence of benefiting the Common weale, and to shun

                                    1, Ambition.
                                    2, Sensualitie.
                                    3, Vaine-glory.
                                    4, Couetousnesse.
                                    5, Vanitie of knowledge.
                                 
                              
                              2, To suruay their Abilities in Iudgement and Knowledge.
                              3, To bee sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of

                                    1, Matters belonging to themselues,

                                          1, Qualities,

                                                1, Necessary,

                                                      1, To Speake, or
                                                      2, Vnderstād the language of that Countrey, into which men trauaile.
                                                   
                                                
                                                2, For ornation,

                                                      1, Skill in managing of Armes.
                                                      2, Skill in Musicke.
                                                      3, Skill in Dauncing.
                                                      4, Skill in Portraying.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          2, Vertues Morall and Diuine.
                                          3, Sciences,

                                                1, Astronomie.
                                                2, Astrologie.
                                                3, Cosmographie.
                                                4, Geographie.
                                                5, Geometrie.
                                                6, Hydrography.
                                                7, Arithmeticke.
                                                8, Architectury.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2, Matters belonging to the Countrey into which they trauaile.
                                 
                              
                              4, To be well accommodated for trauaile with things needfull.
                              5, To resolue to trauaile into such Countries, as may afford least offence and most profit.
                              6, To demand licence of God, of Prince, and Parents.
                           
                        
                        2, In trauaile. Looke the next Table. *
                        
                           , Being Returned:

                              1, To manifest the soundnes of their Religion by

                                    1, Diligent and orderly seruing of God.
                                    2, Wise and faithfull Conuersation: which is discouered by

                                          1, Silence.
                                          2, Incuriositie.
                                          3, Sprightfulnes.
                                          4, Prudence.
                                          5, Bountie.
                                          6, Faithfulnesse.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2, To preferre Honestie before Policie.
                              3, To be knowen by vertuous Endeuours.
                              4, To be stored of a worthy friend.
                              5, To be Constant to his Honourable friend without ambition.
                              6, To bee studious for forraine aduertisements: but not ignorant of home-matters.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2, Speciall: Of whom before we haue abbridged. *
               
            
         
         
            
            Page 35. B. The rest of the second part, abstracted.
            We haue abstracted Voluntary Trauailers general, to consider points before and after trauell: let vs nowe here abbreuiate what is meete in the interim of trauaile: namely,

                  1, To attempt nothing without a good conscience, and to make supplications to God daly.
                  2, To prouide for the health of their bodies,

                        1, By Diet,
                        2, By trauaile,

                              1, To haue faithfull guides and compainons.
                              2, To chuse the least dangerous way.
                              3, To be otherwise well accommodated.
                              4, To be defeded against th'intemperatnesse of the aire.
                              5, To be Armed against accidences on the way.
                              6, To arriue timely in the Inne, &c.
                           
                        
                        3, By moderationi of passions,
                     
                  
                  3, To be Humane and courteous towards all.
                  4, To applie themselues vnto the Customes and maners of the countrey that are not per se Mala.
                  5, To put in practice the qualities for ornation, which are,

                        1, Armes.
                        2, Musicke.
                        3, Poetry.
                        4, Dancing.
                        5, Portraying.
                        6, Vaulting.
                        7, Running.
                        
                           , Dexteritie.
                     
                  
                  6, Singularly to gain the knowledge of

                        1. The Tongue: which consisteth

                              1, In right vnderstandig the same.
                              2, I proper speaking and reading it.
                              3, In true writing, &c.
                           
                        
                        2, The Nature of the people to be discouered,

                              1, In Ciuilitie, or Barbarousnesse.
                              2, In freedome, or Seruilenesse.
                              3, In Religiousnesse, or Profanenesse.
                              4, In Warlike, or Esseminatenesse.
                              5, In Constitution of body and mind.
                           
                        
                        3, The Countrey to be suruayed,

                              1, In the name.
                              2, In the populousnesse, or scarcitie of the people.
                              3, In the situation.
                              4, In the quatititie.
                              5, In the Commo dities which are

                                    1, Naturall:

                                          1, The temperatnesse of the ayre.
                                          2, The fruitfulnesse of the foyle.
                                          3, The plenty of Rituers and Ports.
                                          4, Baths, and medicinable things.
                                       
                                    
                                    2, Artisiciall:

                                          1, Buildings, ad fortitfications, &c.
                                          2, Trades, or Sciences Mechanicke.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              6, In the discommodities that doe consist of

                                    1, Impersections.
                                    2. Wants.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        4, The Lawe: and Customes may bee discerned,

                              1, Generally &c.
                              2, Particularly &c.

                                    1, In Matters Ecclesicasticall,
                                    2, In matters Temporall.
                                    3, In matters Regall, or of Prerogatiue.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        5, The Gouernments,

                              1, Interior. *
                              2, Exterior, descrying

                                    1, The persons gouerning:

                                          1, The Monarke.
                                          2, The Nobles.
                                          3, The Popularitie.
                                       
                                    
                                    2, The people gouerned doe consist

                                          1, Of Husbandmen.
                                          2, Of Handi-crafts men and Labourers.
                                          3, Of Merchants.
                                          4, Of the Nobilitie and Gentrie.
                                          5, Of stipendary Souldiers.
                                          6, Of Ecclesiasticall persons.
                                       
                                    
                                    3, The Instruments whereby men gouerne, and be gouerned, are looked into,

                                          1, By their goodnesse or euilnesse.
                                          2, By the timely precuenting or neglecting of matters.
                                          3, B the execution, or not, of lawes in force.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        6, The secress,

                              1, Common, regardeth

                                    1, Intelligence of forraine Friends, Neuters, or Enemies:

                                          1, In Populousnesse.
                                          2, In Scarcitie of people.
                                          3, In well disciplining them.
                                          4, In permitting a liberty from Martiall discipline.
                                          5, Whether Religious or Profane.
                                          6, Whether Warlike or Esteminate.
                                          7, Whether Free or Seruile.
                                       
                                    
                                    2, Kowledge of the ordinary strength of the State.

                                          1, For sufficiencie of people:
                                          2, For store of Comodities:
                                          3, For plentie of Munition.
                                          4, For the Treasure

                                                2, How increased

                                                      1, By Reuenues.
                                                      2, By Conquests.
                                                      3, By Gifts.
                                                      4, By Tributes.
                                                      5, By Traficke.
                                                      6, By Merchandise.
                                                      7, By Taxations.
                                                   
                                                
                                                2, How dispended

                                                      1, On Almes-houses.
                                                      2, On Housekeeping.
                                                      3, On Building.
                                                      4, On Payments.
                                                      5, On Gifts to strangers.
                                                      6, On Donatiues politicke.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2, Accidentall, are to be sought out

                                    1, In the persons gouerning by

                                          1, Election.
                                          2, Inheritance generall or speciall.
                                          3, Any other hope.
                                       
                                    
                                    2, In persons gouerned:

                                          1, Addicted to ouer-much libertie.
                                          2, How standing affected to the Prince or gouernment.
                                          3, Whether wiser then their generation requireth.
                                          4, How affected in rumors.
                                          5, Who be popular beyond Custome.
                                       
                                    
                                    3, In the instruments, &c.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  7, To aduertise some of the Councel, of things important and needfull.
                  8, To dee all the honour he may vnto the Ambassadors of his Prince, in cafe there be any in that trauaile.
               
            
         
      
      
         
         
         The second part.
         THese Generall Voluntarie Trauailers
are of the temporall Nobilitie
of the Land,These Voluntaries are to vndergoe sixe ponts before trauaile. The first point. whether superior or
inferior: and before they vndertake
Trauaile, if they will be bettered
thereby, are to vndergoe sixe
dueties. The first is to counsaile and
deliberate with themselues, whether they bee mooued
with the iust pretence of doing good to the Common
weale, whereof they are, and for the enabling of themselues,
with such knowledges as appertaine to their seuerall
callings; or whether their owne lusts and affections
pricke them not forward. For oft men are deceiued
for want of due consideration thereof, which turneth
the plots of men topsieturuie. And though it be hard to
reslue on this with humane strength and reason, (for
that reason, which by nature is in man, is feeble and differeth

little from that of brute beasts) yet there is another
reason in man, or the same at the least enlightned and
sanctified by God, the which through faith and knowledge
of his reuealed wil, teacheth man to do that which
is good and pleasing in his sight. Wherefore, as this reason
is pure & of an holy vnderstāding nature, so must the
resolutiōs of men (if they would be approued and crowned
with blessing) be shaped accordingly. And therefore
all particular affects, rising from the disordinate appetite
of man corrupt and vnsauorie (as Ambition, Sensualitie,Fiue principall euil mouers of men to trauaile to be shunned.
vaine glorie, couetousnes, vanitie of knowledge,
& such like) must die in these honorable kind of Trauailers;
and in lieu of them the rootes of all vertuous affections
must be planted, to the glorie of God, the good
of themselues, their Prince & Countrie. For, considering
these are principally the select members ordeined
to trauaile, by the appointing hand of God, to helpe
the motion and gouernement of the helme in temporall
& ciuill causes oftentimes, let such take heede those
vaine and gadding humors plucke not downe the iudgement
of God, to presse such to trauaile for punishment
of their wayes; whereby none can seale vnto themselues
the assurance of life, or prosperitie, during their trauaile
or afterwards.
         Now,The second point, in the second place it is required that such examine
themselues before trauaile, whether they haue
capable parts answerable to the callings of these Trauailers.
The capable parts of Trauailers consist in knowledge
and iudgement of those things that may best profit
them in trauaile,Knowledge & Iudgement the enhablers of trauailers. and furnish them of things needeful,
by which men are fitted to accomplish so honorable an
enterprise.
         
            
By Iudgement is meant the vnderstanding age, seeing
into the affaires of their natiue Countrie: Knowledge, it
is of the wants which are naturally in vs; the which are
to be supplyed and repaired, by learning and experience.
         For, as without iudgement men cannot gather the
best things in trauaile,Without learning or experience, no knowledge. that may fitte iumpest with the
State of their Countrie and themselues: so without
knowledge things cannot bee performed well.Iudgement the collector of profitable things. And
therefore it behoueth euerie one, so intending to trauaile,
to be endued with learning and discretion: for by
learning knowledge is atchieued, and discretiō enableth
the iudgement to discerne what things and Policies are
to be receiued what reiected. And vnlesse men put on
before trauaile these Armours, they cannot winne the
forte of their desires. For, he that trauaileth to see experiences
in other Nations, and hath not power to discerne,The defect of learning or iudgement what it breedeth.
what are needefull to bee gathered, commeth
home as a bodie to the graue without a soule. In which
plight we see daily experience in this Land: for many
trauaile young that want both: others of more vnderstanding
that want iudgement and others whose iudgemēts
are actiue, yet faile in learning. So as many when they
come home proue too subtill, & without conscience, in
their resolutions, and consequently dangerous to be conuersed
with; others new fangled hobby horses, & of smal
vnderstanding, or little the better to be conuersed with.
         From hence the third dutie springeth,The third point namely Instruction
in knowledge fit for trauailers: the which is either
of things appertaining to the Country where such trauel,
or to thēselues.Three things appertaine to themselues. First, as concerning things belonging to
thēselues, they are three; qualities, vertues and sciences.

The qualities are duple; either for necessitie,Qualities duple. The necessary. or for Ornation.
The necessarie is the speaking or the vnderstanding
of the tongues of those Countries into which such
trauaile: for these are the instruments of knowledge and
experience; without which men shall consume great
time vnprofitably in other Countries, whiles they are
learning the tongue. And therefore let such practise the
tongues before they trauaile, that they make not a shadowe
of their knowledge as many doe: who trauailing
into other Countries attaine to nothing, saue the speaking
of their languages.For Ornation. The qualities for Ornation, are
practise in managing of Armes and weapons, skill in
Musicke and daunsing and drawing the counterfeites of
any thing: The estimation of all which are so approued
that they neede no confirmation; For euerie man liuing
in the Courts of Princes shall bee honoured by them.
The second point of knowledge are vertues,Their vertues. which
must be the Councellors of such in euerie Action,
to make them esteemed, and make them right Courtiers
at the first entrance, in euerie forreine State. And
therefore let them inhabite euerie diuine and morall
vertue, that traineth men vp to humanitie & ciuile conuersation:
without which it is a vaine thing to trauaile
and expect any good ende.
         The last and third point of knowledge is Science or
the knowledge in naturall and mathematicall Artes: that
is to say, an insight in the grounds of Astronomie, Astrology,
Cosmographie, Geographie, Hydrographie, Geometrie,
Arithmeticke and Architecture: all which whosoeuer
trauaileth shall employ, and without which many
things of note shall be foreslowen, and left vnperfectly
knowen. For, the better men are grounded in

these, the more profite shall they make of their times. In
so much as if a skilfull fortifier or Architectist doe but
lay his eyes vpon the modell of any Towne or fortification,
he will deliuer the true plot, strength or weakenes
naturall or artificiall that it containes, or ghesse verie
neere; the which an ignorant person can neuer doo, but
by chaunce. So it is of those which excell in Corography
or Geographie; who but riding poste through a
Countrie will make a particular description of euerie
thing seated on the earth, in proportion or neere, aswell
of Townes, Fortes, Houses, as of Riuers, Hilles, Dales,
Woddes, Plaines and Wayes, or any thing else that
lies within the kenning of their eies, or by necessarie collection.
And therefore we finde recorded that in times
of war messengers of the enemie were wont to be blinded,
when they approched neere the fortifications or
Campes, and so carried backe till they were out of
kenning. The which may be saide of the rest: For these
Artes are instruments to settle and fixe in the memorie
obiects that fall to the senses,The rules of Art are as faith full helpers of mens memories. but especially to the eye:
euen as wee see the practicke Musicians will instantly
play whatsoeuer chaunceth in harmonies sound to their
eare. I consideratly left out Musicke among the Mathematicall
Artes, though it be an excellent Science: yet in
a Trauailer or Gentleman let it be rather a qualitie, as we
haue saide to grace him in conuenient times,Musicke rather a qualitie then a Science in trauailers of this kinde. and places
to be sociable, then a Science whereof men make profession.
For, a Gentleman may haue the qualitie to
play well vpon gentlemanlike instruments, without the
Science or Arte of any grounds of musicke; euen as
there may be excellent Musicians that can not strike one
true stroke of any instrument, and yet both concluded

vnder one name. For the theorie & practicke in Musicke
are two; & the one seemely for gentlemē of other means,
namely the practicke: although it cānot be but a singular
commendation for any that excell in both, so that hinder
not other more necessarie sciences. As touching the
knowledge of the Countrie wherein men trauaile, wee
haue in other places prescribed sufficient rules to make
prouision, and to remooue inconueniences, so as for
breuitie the same may be omitted here.
         The fourth duetie is of Charitie. For,The fourth point. hauing gotten
licence of their Prince, & friends to whom such owe
subiection (otherwise their pretēce will seeme Irregular)
they must accommodate themselues of all things needfull
for their trauaile;To be well accomodated of all things needfull. the chiefe whereof is only prouision
of monie: which by billes of exchange, is the safest
and most profitable way, the course also being common.
Onely this, let such take order they may haue
sufficient of Marchants wheresoeuer they shall come:
for want breedeth many inconueniences. And therefore
let such proportion their estate with the largest before
trauaile: the which must bee according to euerie
ones course, estate and retinewe. For, some Countries
are verie chargeable generally; where either dearth,
much riotte, or troubles reigne. Moreouer, of what
State soeuer a man be, it is not good to trauaile with
a greater traine,To trauell in a priuate fashion most gainefull. then neede requires. For, it is vnpossible
that such an one shall attaine vnto the light of many
things and secrets: which more priuate men may. Neither
can it quit cost, since the voluntarie action of any
subiect (vnlesse in some publike seruice of their Prince
and Countrie) ought to bee contented with meane
pompe. For, such in a strange Countrie are subiect to

scoffes; and in an Enemies or a Neuters Countrey,
Iealousie and publique eyes will bee looking on
such.
         In the fift place it is required,The fift point. that they resolue to
goe into such Countreys, the state of which may best
like the State of which they are, and which may afford
them best gaine of knowledge and experience;
either to reforme in them defects of nature,What Countries men must resolue to trauell in. or to
benefite most their Common weale. And though
the enemies policie auaileth most vnto the State of
ones Countrey, yet when such that haue made their
abode there, shall returne, it is doubtfull, how acceptable
that may bee. For commonly, great suspicion
tendeth on such long after, vnlesse in the interim of
their trauailes they carrie themselues with risentiment
and respect. The Enemies of euery State are
two,Two enemies of an estate vpon cause. such as stand out in Religion, and contrary opinion,
in the seruice of God: and such as iniustice, either
of not due reuerēce exhibited, or of defamation,
or of preiudice, in goods or persons really, or collaterally,
dayly worketh amongst Princes.A twofold cōsideration of Countries friends. But of Countries
to be trauailed into, there is a double consideration,
whose friendships are auaileable to the Common
weale: to weet, Those that neighborhood, Religion,
aliance, perpetuall vnitie, and such like natural
and ciuill bonds, haue conioyned in loue, league, and
confederacie: and, Those which merchandise, mutuall
commerce, and such like foraine policie to benefit
each others Land, haue linked in amitie: Which
also are by so much the more fast tied,What Countreys afford most gaine to trauell in. by how much
one standeth in neede of another, how farre soeuer
they bee distant off. In these, Trauailers shall reape

most profit & contentation for their Common weale.
For as he that would learne any facultie, had neede to
studie the best books that write thereof; so a Trauailer
that laboreth for the good of his Countrey, must frequent
those places, that afford most points of needfull
knowledge and experience. And though a wise man
may collect, out of euery Coūtrie he abideth in, some
profitable obseruations, yet the neighbour countreys
of this Iland yeeld more requisite considerations than
others. Hereof it commeth, that by the motions of
France, Spaine, Germany, the Lowe Countreys, Burgundie,
and Denmarke, this Realme is in action, & made
sensible, either of trouble, detriment, or quiet; whereas
the troubles of Muscouie, the free Townes, high Germany,
Italy, Barbary, the dominions of the Turke and
Persian, incommodate this nation little, but by diuerting
of the trade of merchants another way. But as
touching those Countreys, which afford particular
gaine of knowledge and information of maners and
ciuill cariage, these Trauailers shal find in euery good
and orderly gouernment thorow Christendome, but
singularly here at home, & in the Courts of France, &
Vniuersities of Germany, Spaine, and Burgundie. And
though Italie haue the common prayse for these, yet
the inconueniences and corruptions, that are mixed
with the ciuilitie of that Countrey, may other wayes
perswade men of iudgement. And since I seeme to
contrary the opinions of many worthy Gentlemen,
let it not be impertinent here to consider some speciall
things cōcerning that State. For,Why men trauaile into Italy. Italy moueth most
of our Trauailers to go and visit, of any other State
in the world: And not without cause, it being an ancient

nurcerie and shop of libertie, the which to the
affects of men is precious and estimable. Moreouer,
I find amongst an infinite number of licencious mouers,
fiue seemly halers of men thither,Fiue specialties in the commēdation of Italy. hardly found
otherwhere all together. The first is the temperatnesse 
of the aire, and fruitfulnesse of the soyle, with answerable
delights, from, and in the Countrey. Yet we see
how slender a thing that is to drawe honourable
personages, vnlesse necessitie for health sake presse
them. The second is the speaking of the tongue and 
residencing in the notable Vniuersities there found.
As concerning the tongue, although it bee an excellent
and eloquent speach, of many other it may
bee to vs least estimable. Neuerthelesse, in vaine it
is to goe so farre for that, which at home with small
paines may singularly bee attained vnto. Moreouer,
the Vniuersities there are little beneficiall for a
Generalist, such as these Trauailers not vnworthily
arrogate. The third is the variable manners and inclinations 
of the people, to ciuilitie and humanitie,
the which by right of prescription belongeth to that
nation of all the world.England the best Court. Yet considering the Court of
England at this day is the most compleat in all things
and vnto all people of other nations & Courts in the
world, and that which can make men (if they be as studious
therin, as abroad, to enforme themselues) perfect
in ciuility & good maners, & obseruant enough;
both for that the puritie of Religion (which is the best
Ciuilian) and the long continuance thereof with vs,
hath framed our Nobilitie in fashion, and our Prince
in State, to recommend the Court of England aboue
anie that I could euer heare of, in all points that are

honorable and commendable: This is but in shew a
 fond entiser. The fourth, is the multiplex and different
gouernments, and sundrie policies there found;
namely, of Rome, of Venice, of Naples, of Florence, of
Millane, of Genoa, of Mantoa, of Ferrara, of Placentia
and Parma, of Vrbine, and others. But these being
different gouernments from ours, and better described
already, than any one Trauailer is able to pen
downe: though this bee of the fiue the principall,
yet how little it booteth our Sate, I leaue to Politicians
 to resolue. The fift and last, is the speciall gallerie
of monuments and olde aged memorials of histories,
records of persons and things to bee seene thorowout
the Countrey. But this being a fantasticall
attracter, and a glutton-feeder of the appetite, rather
than of necessarie knowledge, I will mention no further
thereof. Notwithstanding,Italy a corrupter of men. all these together
are auaileable, were it not for the infinite corruptions,
almost ineuitable, that inuest Trauailers after
small abode there; as it is reported, I know not vpon
what ground, of the Realme of Ireland. Wherefore,
let these honorable Trauailers frequuent the best places:
and if so bee they must needes goe thither, let
them beware of Rome,Rome the Forge of euil. the Forge of euery policie,
that setteth Princes at oddes, or that continueth them
in debates, little or much: the tempter of Subiects to
ciuil dissensions, & the seller of all wickednes and heathenish
impieties, or the machediuell of euill policies
and practises, that are vnmeete subiects for these worthy
Trauailers to spend their time about. As for any
good thing, which that State can benefit a Trauailer
by, I haue not heard of, otherwise than the loathing

of the same afterwards: for which pretence no man
hath warrant to trauaile thither, or other-where.
         Now in the last and sixt place it is required of all
Trauailers,The sixt point. that they demaund licence and fauour at
the hands of God, vpon these grounds to protect and
blesse them in their iourney; and not without the
good leaue of their Prince and parents. For if it be
a commendable point and duetie for a man to aske
his Parents, Tutor, Master, and Prince leaue to trauaile,
then is it the office of a man, to desire the same
at the hands of God,Without the blessing of God men trauaile in vaine. who is the Souereigne of all
those. For without his pleasure and consent alasse
where are our motions to any good acte, or the
meanes by which they are aduanced or preserued?
So that though this be the last considered of vs, yet
is it the first and best of all things to be respected and
performed. For since knowledge, learning, experience,
honour, health, prosperitie, and all other blessings,
be the mediate or immediate gifts of God, it is a
foolishnes for any to perswade, and blesse their owne
actions without consulting with God the eternall
reason, that guideth all things to their proper endes;
yea, the dereigled Trauailers to labour in vaine, and
for a punishment to returne home no better, than
when they went foorth; and peraduenture in many
things worse. For, as the obseruance of his reuealed
will encourageth man to goe forward in all godlinesse,
and commendable actions; so the neglect thereof
maketh him taste of his secret iudgements, prepared
for the carelesse and wilfull breakers of his commaund
and will. Hitherto concerning the generall
dueties before trauaile.
         
            
In the interim of trauaile,In the interim of trauaile sixe things are to be obserued. there likewise resteth sixe
generall obseruations of these Trauailers for the aduancement of their peregrination: Whereof the first
is to attempt nothing without consulting with their
conscience,The first. and imploring the fauour of God, that
euery action may haue a promise of blessing, and acceptation
aswell among those with whom such shall
liue, as of their owne Prince and Countrey, when
happily they shall returne. The neglect whereof openeth
the gate to infinite dangers and euils. For,
the feare of God, which is an adiunct to this duetie,
serueth for a curbe to restraine all improuident & violent
courses, that carie men into inconueniences, and
for a guide to aduise them of all things warrantable,
honourable and pleasing in the sight of God & men:
and therefore it is requirable, that these diligently euery
day priuately conferre and consult with God in
their spirits and prayers made vnto him. The first
thus regarding the stay of the soule;The seond. so the second office
respecteth the good health of the bodie, whereof
Trauailers are not to be carelesse & improuident:
for he that dependeth on fortune, exposeth himselfe
to many deceits, perils, & losse of time. I therfore obserue
three preuenters of mischiefes,Three preuenters of mischiefes in trauailing. & inconueniences
to the safety & health of Trauailers, namely, Diet,
Trauailing or Exercise, and moderation of Passions.
         First,Diet. let the diet of euery man be so moderate, as
neither the ayre wherein such liue afflict them, either
with exceeding heate or cold, the which in some
countreys Trauailers shal meete with, but by little and
little accustome their bodies to endure the hardnes of
the Countrey clime, which to contrary bodies is very

dangerous suddainly. For which cause, Auicen the notable
naturalist auouched, that if a Scythian should violētly,
& in a very short space be trāsported into India,
either he would suddainly fall sicke or die: the which
he would not necessarily bee, so be it he tooke time
in trauaile by land or sea. Neither let any continue
long in those places, where the aire is pestiferous, vnlesse
their bodies can away therwith. For which cause
the Cynicke Diogenes reioyced after his banishment,
that he made a good change to be exiled from Sinope
(a most piercing and sharpe ayre about the confines
of the Euxine sea) to liue afterwards in Greece. And
lastly, let the diet of all men, for eating, drinking, sleeping,
clothing, and such like, be answerable to euery
ones nature, that such may alwaies keep themselues in
one temper, if possibly, Winter and Summer; the
which is the greatest preseruatiue of mans health.
         The second preuenter of inconuenience of health
is trauailing from place to place, and dayly exercise,Exercise.
when such are abiding in any place, with moderation
and respect. For, ouer-much labour distill the
vitall and animal spirits, which is most dangerous.
For the trauailing from place to place,Sixe things in iourneying to be regarded. sixe things
are to bee regarded. First, to haue in iourneying
(if neede require) faithfull and honest guides and 
companions: and in speciall cases, let such change
rayment with their guides. Secondly, let them of 
two wayes take the least dangerous, and most passeable:
so as alwayes the neerest way is not the best
to bee chosen. Hereof the Germanes haue a saying,
Gut vneg vnih vnar nie krumb: and wee
haue a Prouerbe not much vnlike, The farther

             way about, the neerer way home. Thirdly, in long
iourneys to be prouided of meat and drinke, and such
like prouisions. Therefore those that passe thorow
the deserts of Arabia, Tartarie, Persia, Scythia, and the
Carouans of Swecia and Muscouie, make large prouisions:
and for some passages, as in the sea of Sande
in Africa, and other places, men are guided by the
Compasse, standing in need of Pilots for the passage.
 Fourthly, to make prouision against the extreamities
of heate and colde, that in some places are outragious,
in which the seasons of the yeere are to be respected.
Wherefore he that will trauaile thorow Swecia,
and Muscouie on sleddes, vnlesse he shall rub his nosthrils
with the snowe and yee, to recall and settle his
motiue spirits, he shall be in extreame danger to lose
them thorow the excesse of colde. And in the yeere
1498, of seuenty thousand Turkes that made an inrode
into Muscouie, fourtie thousand suddenly were
frozen to death. Whereupon the Turkes verily beleeue,
that the Polonians and Muscouites are defenced
by the celestiall powers. No person is able to
trauell out of doores in the Troglodites land, without
shooes, the ground is so scalding hote: insomuch
that they roste their meat, by putting the same into a
brasse vessell, and setting it in the Sunne. And in the
kingdom of Naples and Champain, the heat is so great,
and ayre so pestiferous, during Iune, Iuly, and August,
till the first raine of September, that the better
sort will not trauaile, though the King commaund
them, from home. Let these suffice for Trauailers to
beware thereof, vnlesse vpon vrgent necessitie, and
 with good respect. Fiftly, to be prouided against the

rage of wilde beastes, and of robbers, the which by
good companie is the safest way alwayes. Lastly, to 
arriue early at their Inne or baite, and to looke that
the chamber where such lodge be well seated and defended:
to haue in their chamber a Tinder boxe to
light fire or candle; and finally, vnlesse need require, to
dissemble departure from the Inne. Of this last, a
man cannot bee too carefull.
         The third and last preuenter of sickenesse,Moderation of Passion. and
censurer of health is passion, which is quadruplex
(according to the foure complexions generall of
men) namely, Mirth, Sorow, Anger, and Patience: the
which remedie or continue euery distemperature of
the mind. And as, per antiperistasin, bodily discords
are tuned and appeased, so it is of the mind. For Mirth
is a cordiall to sorowfull and melancholicke bodies;
wheras sorow so much continueth that humor, as desperatnesse,
or frensie, or both is to be feared. Sorow, in
meane, maketh sanguine bodies, and merrily disposed,
wise, & full of respect. But of these two, mirth is euermore
to be cōmended, so it be not ouer-light & vnciuil.
So chollerick bodies, seeing they are fretting & angry
at light occasiōs, let them cure their imperfectiōs
of nature by patience: for such are otherwise vnsociable
& dangerous to be cōuersed with, as endangering
themselues. For I neuer saw so cholericke a man, but
hee hath met with his match: and this of strangers is
reproueable. So those of flegmaticke spirits that patience
hath enfeebled, that such want the harts of men,
as ordained to suffer all things, though this be a ciuill
& singular vertue in Trauailers, yet let none be in extreamity
so patient, as it make himself a sot & a foole,

to heare his God, and his Prince & Country, and his
honor wronged, whē as honestly and fitly he may, &
ought to make resistance or apprehension. Finally, as
the tyrannizing of these, subiect many to incurable euils,The Law of God the best Counsailer and Physician of the soule. bringing to consumption the vitall and animall
spirits: so ought euery worthy Trauailer to preuent
these inward mischiefs by godly and timely counsell,
that those slie passions frustrate not his enterprise.
         Now in the third place,The third. let euery Trauailer bee of
such honest and seemely carriage, towards all with
whom they conuerse, for ciuilitie and humanity, as
neither contempt, derision, irrision, pertinacitie in discourse,
bitternesse, or no respect be vsed. For these
be dissoluers of friendship, and daungerous perturbations
for anie stranger, in the Countrey of an other.
         Fourthly,The fourth. it is the duetie of all men to fit and applie
themselues, not onely to their maners and customes
with whom they liue; but singularly to haue
an eye of diligent watch to their particular affaires as
well for knowledge and encrease of experience, as
for the retention of a sound and holy conscience. As
touching the first branch, let no man loose the raigns
of his owne lust and fancie amongst strangers, so that
he expose himselfe to reproche & scandall. And considering
many nations are apt to deceiue, a man must
liue warily with them, taking heed he giue no offence.
And though the customes of other nations, where a
man liueth, are to be followed, yet in the case of God,
or of a mans own conscience, ther ought to be a scruple.
For as it becommeth none to leaue the truth, or to
exercise any wicked actiō there; so neither let any follow
the beastly guises, or wicked customs of the coūtrey,

wherby honesty & good maners may be corrupted:What customs are to be followed in other countreys.
but in euery State to obserue thē, as Diet, Apparell,
Gesture, Curtesie, and such like, which in some
places are precisely to be obserued. But as cōcerning
that other branch, let men auoid to sacrifice or do reuerence
to any Idole or Hobgoblin. For though many
haue so large a cōscience, that they perswade thēselues,
so they keepe their hearts to God, they may
bend their knee, and bow themselues before such
trash without hurt at all, yet God will not forget
the hypocrisie of such. For whoso vseth any outward
reuerence to any Idole or diuel, incurreth the
wrath of God, and is thereby made subiect to all imperfections
and euils. And if in ciuil matters many be
wonderful respectiue, that they will not come in presence,
when they know for certaintie, that they shall
see or heare their Mstris, Prince, or friend dishonored,
how much more ought al men in the case of God
to be precise; not only to shun the sight & hearing of
their God blasphemed, and dishonored by their Masses,
and estimation of reliques & images, but to seeke
to right the same if it lay in their powers?
         But cōsidering no stranger hath warrant, at this day,No Customes in forraine States, how wicked soeuer, are to be publikely withstood.
to oppose himselfe against them in their owne countrey,
let him rather abiure so heathenish a place,
where he cannot liue freely, than endure the sight
thereof: yea, though some thinke themselues dischargeable,
if they trauaile, and not both see & heare
them. If there be any such, let them imitate that worthy
Themistocles: who hauing, in the vaine yeeres of
his youth, accustomed himselfe to learn an endure the
sight of many things, which in nature hee abhorred,

which gaue him the smacke of an excellent memory,
yet in the better time of his yeeres he did spend more
time, to learne to forget things vnnecessarie and euill;
than in learning that which was honorable; & found
it more difficult & hard for him. For, the knowledge of
much euill tempteth man ful oft, & withdraweth the
hart more out of the way, than the strength of naturall
reason can set him aright againe long after.
         Fiftly,The fift. let euery one, in his calling, exercise such ornate
and seemely qualities of the body, that both may
inable them for ciuill conuersation, as also for auaile
in things requireable in Nobilitie and Gentlemen.
And of the nobler sort it is required alwayes, that
they discouer spirited bodies, and more actiue minds
than other Gentlemen, labouring to perfect them by
much industry.What things are chiefly to be exercised. The things to be exercised, are, horsemanship,
managing of all sorts of weapons, musicke,
dancing, Poetrie, limming and portraiting, vaulting,
running, & practising the fiue strengths of the arme,
namely, griping, lifting, thrusting and holding out at
the armes end, pulling and drawing, and throwing or
darting. These by practise wil giue vigor to the defect
of nature: for by nature it is impossible to be strong
in all, the one being contrary to the other: the benefit
wherof is so great, that little men shall haue no disaduantage,
by the greatest persons in the world, in exercising,
or single encountring, so the one practise and
the other neuer. But these, being recreations, may
not hinder more necessary studies, though to excell
in them be honorable, and right excellent.
         The sixt and last generall duetie,The sixt. which is the very
point which euery Trauailer ought to lay his

witts about, To get knowledge for the bettering of himselfe
and his Countrie: This, being the obiect of their
Countries defects and the subiect of Trauailers,Sixe principall heads of knowledge which are to be learned in trauelling. in a
word containeth Six generall heads, to be learned and
vnderstood: namely, the tongue, the Nature of the people,
the Countrey, the Customes; the Gouernment of
the State; & the secrets of the same: the which are to be
sought out wheresoeuer these shall come. And though
some one of these inuest many with the honorable title
of Trauailers,The meanes whereon all policie is grownded. yet in how much any shall be found defectiue
in any of these, by so farre is hee short of the
compleatnesse and true estimation that apprertaineth to
Trauailers Regular and honorable. These things are
the vtensils, and materialls of States men, concerning
forraine matters: the which many actiue mindes though
sitting at home are well read in: and except it bee for
the secrets and other occurrences, alteratiōs & changes,
the difference is not much betweene the home States
man, not hauing spent some time in trauaile, & the compleate
Trauailer, for forraine matters. Yet, herein hath
a Trauailer the start of a home States man, which is fed
by aduertisements only, and is ledde by other mens eyes:
Euen as a Soldier in Action may presume of better euēt,
then the Theorist, whose booke rules, in accidentall
things, faile many times as in particular motions. For,
the eye hath a more perfect sense in iudgement then
the eare, if the same be rightly considered by iudgement.
         Of these sixe the tongue is the first by right to be discoursed
of:The Tongue the first point to be learned. the right knowledge whereof is somewhat
more then wee required such to learne before they vndertooke
trauaile. For, now in the interim of trauaile

it is requisite, that Trauailers grow in perfection: otherwise
such as stay at home may ranke with them, which is
reproachfull. The perfection wherof consisteth in three
things,Three perfections in Languages. namely, in vnderstanding, speaking, and writing
the same.
         To vnderstand a tongue perfectly,What the vnderstanding is of a tongue. is not barely to vnderstand
what is read or heard pronounced, but to obserue
the peculiar phrase, idiom & constructiō of words,
and singularly to note whereof the tongue hath his speciall
deriuation if it be a deriuatiue, or his composition:
wherin Trauailers cānot be too good Grāmarians. For,
in these dayes there is the true confusion of Babell and
languages,The State of all Languages at this day. through the world either deriuatiuely, or
compositiuely, or both. And though at all times the like
might be auouched, howsoeuer there was generally
held many ancient Tongues, as the Hebrue, the Chaldean
or Assyrian, the Arabian, and the Egyptian; yet by
their characters and composition it is euident that they
were all confounded, or perished, sauing the Hebrue,
which was the most auncient of all the rest; and the
spring from which the rest deriuatiuely or compositiuely
are descended; necessitie and imitation, being the
parent of these and succeeding languages. For, Adam
the good Grammarian of the Hebrue tongue, appropriated
words, not ad placitum, but according to the
nature of things; and framed a certaine idiome of speach
which in his dayes was generally spoken till the confusion
of Languages.
         So, since, other Monarches of the world haue excogitated
words according to the light of nature, and operation
of things vnknowne, to perfect their deriued languages
by composition and meere inuention.
         
            
Now,The Hebrue tongue the Phoenician, or Sarmatian Character. as we see the simple and vncorrupt Hebrue
Tongue was the originall, to other Languages, and singularly
to the Phoenician, Chaldean, & Assyrian, (these
two only differing in that the Assyrian had the purer
dialect and rellish of the Hebrue) so euerie Monarchie
haue arrogated the deriuation and composition of the
Tongues subiected vnto them. Hereof it comes, that the
foure Monarchiall tongues are accompted originals, by
vsurpatiō, and not of proprietie: namely, the Chaldean or
Assyrian, which in the first Monarchie was famous, & to
particular States subiected gaue words and manners of
speach: Howbeit, the Armenian, and Arabian languages
held their own though in some wordes and phrases
they might be by commerce cōfounded, as we see other
neighbour Countries through the world borrowe and
search from others to appropriate their tongues.Vnder the second. So was
it of the second Monarchie, the Persian, when not
onely the Chaldean becāe corrupted, but that Language
also was driuen to search after the phrases and words of
the Persian, till the third Monarchie came vp by Alexander,
namely,Vnder the third, the Grecian: the singularitie of which
tongue for proprietie of words hath deriued it selfe into
the veines of all Ciuil Countries, but singularly of States
tributary; making the fourth Monarchie glorious, namely
the Romaine. And this Monarchie stretched it self far
and neere.Vnder the fourth. We see the generall esteeme of the Latine
tongue, through Europe; giuing as it were deriuation,
vnto the Italian and Spanish tongues, with many proper
and apt words; making also France, Germanie, England
and other Iles & Coūtries fertile by the proper idiom of
that tong, as tributary States to the same, especially wher
Colonies or gouernmēts be established. Herof it coms to

passe that our English tongue hath a smacke of the Britanish
(which is a deriuatiue from the Grecian or Natolian tongue)
of the Latine,The deriuation and Cōposition of English tongue. of the Scottish, and Pictish,
of the Danish, Gothish, Vandalish and Norwegian, of
the Norman and French tongues; and also of the Flemish
and Wallonish: which though not by conquest,
yet since the reigne of Henrie the first, by permissiō haue
inhabited this Land whereof our tongue rellisheth also:
as in these dayes (through commerce and affaires) of the
Italian and Spanish and Irish tongues, howbeit we hold
that the Brittish tongue is one of the Eleuen mother
tongues in Europe. In like sort stāds the French tongue,
the Italian, Spanish, Scottish, and Dutch (though of
others the most pure) being fallats and good gallimaufries
of others tongues according either as they haue
beene conquered and gouerned by strangers, or thorow
comemerce stand in neede of one anothers wordes and
phrases.
         Wherof it may be concluded, that euerie language
in his owne Countrey is most honorable, and equally
ancient, though it be a a deriuatiue, quoad tempus, but
not quoad perfectionem. Neuerthelesse, we see some
Languages more general then other, & more esteemed
here in Europe,The reason why one tongue is esteemed aboue another. and that for two causes. One through
situatiō of the Coūtrie, which maketh other neighbour
Nations of necessitie acquaint themselues with one anothers
Language (the which chanceth to few Ilands) that
they may trafficke and haue commerce. Hence the
French, the high Duch, and the Sclavonian tongues
are generall tongues, passing through many kingdomes
and States. The like may also bee alleaged for some other
States within the Continent that haue been at any

time great, and enforced others to seeke to them. The
other cause is thorow the perfection of the tongue, as
of copiousnes & learning cōtained therin, the which
also make the same generally to bee regarded for necessitie
of knowledge, or for perfecting their owne
barbarisme. Hence the Greeke and Latine tongues
are so generally taught and learned, thorow the greatest
parts of the whole world: the words and phrases
whereof are so well knowen, that the Princes of Europe
negotiate and contract in writing in the Latine,Why men treat in the Latine tongue for the most part.
as the Turke with Christian Princes in the Greeke,
as also for that princes Soueraigne will not yeeld at
this day the honour to other Kings than to those
that are indifferent, and cannot bee challenged of
any people. And hence haue the French and Italians
gotten the starte of vs, in that their tongue was
sooner refined, and cast into bookes of many arts and
histories and points of knowledge: though at this
day the English tongue draweth neere to the glory
of the best of them. Lastly, hence it commeth,The cause why we esteem the Italian tongue so much. that
the yong Gentlemen of England affect so much the
Italian tongue; For that containeth spirit of inuention
good phrase, vtterance, and delightfull matter to
their appetites.
         But to returne to our point, let Trauailers (hauing
made obseruance of these things,What the speaking of a tongue is. concerning the
state of the tongue of that countrey wherein they
trauaile) moreouer take paines in the speaking, according
to the naturall accent and tune of the countrey.
And as, by much reading and labour, a man
shall attaine to the vnderstanding, and consequently,
by a diligent obseruation, to the writing; so by conference

and much parley the speaking of the tongue
will be soone attained vnto. And in speaking of the
Tongues, euery Countreys accent, time and tune is
best without affectation: Hence wee see those that
speake the high Dutch, do striue to vtter their words
highly, and with spirit, not hudling as the French, but
distinctly, as the Italian & Spaniard, yet not with that
chaunting manner. Likewise in speaking the Latine
there is a more ciuill elocution and cariage of the
mouth, than in speaking the high Dutch, or Sclauonish,
& with greater tēperance,What the writing of a toung is. yet with some affectation
like the Italian & Spaniard: euen so in writing elegantly,
euery tongue in effect hauing peculiar Characters,
men must follow the most esteemed fashion
both in framing the letters & sentences, according to
the Orthography of the country. I meane, hauing occasion to write letters, let such vse that kind of hand
most common and commendable, and those phrases
which in letters almost euery nation hath peculiar, as
in sub. and superscriptiōs. For, the least error in these,
may either offer wrong to the party written vnto, or
discouer weaknes & imperfectiō reproueable in Trauailers.
Lastly, as the vnderstāding of a tongue is gottē
by good Authors, principles, & common conference
with men: so to speake the tongue well it behoueth a
Trauailer to frequēt those places & persons, where &
amongst whō the tongue best flourisheth. And as the
Court & Citie excel in the dialect, and fine phrase; so
the Countrey phrase & words are of no lesse esteeme
and regard: in so much as no man can be accounted
worthily excellent in any tongue, that wants discretion
to speake Court-like and Country-like, when, and
where it is requisite. Moreouer, considering the manifold

Countries that Trauailers may come into, it
may be demanded here (although we haue long plodded
vpō the tongue already)Whether euery tongue be of equal importance for trauailers. whether euery tongue be
of equal importāce, to be perfectly vnderstood & spoken
of these Trauailers? For answere wherof, I presuppose
two rules: first, it is impossible for any man to be
an obseruer of things required in these Trauailers, &
an excellent linguist in al tongues, considering the infinite
time such an one must spend in the gaining of
thē. Secondly, there is no such necessity for a Trauailer
to learn them all; wherfore let him busie himselfe
about such only as may stand his State & Country in
best auaile,Those toungs are best, that profit most. if so be he shal happily come to prefermēt.
This resteth in the iudgemēt of Trauailers chiefly, To
make election: for sometimes the state of things alter,
that necessitate a State to haue in recōmendation the
general speakers of such and such tongues. But for this
Coūtry, no one rule of certainty can perpetually hold
to all men, considering many Trauailers prescribe vnto
thē diuers ends: as some the knowledge only of the
tongues; others trauaile for knowledge contēplatiue,
to whō the Hebrue, Greek, Latine, Chaldie, & Syriack
tongues are most precious, wherin all ancient monuments
of things past to bee knowen, are treasured vp;
which rauish more the mind, then the knowledge of
things present, by how much they prognosticate future
euents. But for these honourable Trauailers (in
regard of their pretence) the Latine,Tongues most needfull for this State. the French, and
the Spanish tongues are most necessary, and like to
hold. So the alteration of things causeth a necessity for
a season to trauaile in the Italian, as at this time the
Germane and the Lowe Countrey language, that
of Denmarke, Muscouie, and such like confrontire

tongues: The which let Trauailers busie themselues
about, more then other tongues, that for illustration
and contemplatiue knowledge, and learning, are to
bee respected, whensoeuer it is requisite. Let these
things suffice for the first point to bee respected of
Trauailers Voluntary.
         2 The second is the nature of the people of that
Nation,The nature of the people; the second point. in which they trauaile; which is the generall
inclination, sway, maners, and fashion of thē in euery
common motion, or action, whereby may be discouered
imperfection in things euil, or apprehension of
that which is good: by the ensample whereof other
Nations may generally reforme things amisse, and
establish their policie, euen as Trauailers in particular
may fashion themselues for all seasons, places and
persons to be compleat, in ciuill conuersation in the
iudgement of the world. Now that Trauailers may
discouer this amongst the people of a Nation or
State,Fiue discouerers of the nature of people. let them consider fiue things: First, whether
the people bee ciuill or barbarous. Secondly, whether
they be free or seruile. Thirdly, whether religious
or profane. Fourthly, whether warlike or effeminate.
And fiftly, of what condition of bodie, and
disposition of mind. These containe the maners, nature,
and inclination of all people in a generalitie; of
which we will discourse in order.The first discouerer of the peoples nature. And first, therefore,
let Trauailers consider, whether the people in generall
be ciuill or barbarous; and that whether by discipline
(the best Ciuilian Master)Two causes of ciuility or barbarousnesse. or by naturall temperature
of bodies. Such are the Grecians, and those of
the Iles of Iapan and Chios: as on the contrary side,
the people of Africa, America, Magellanica, and those

of Northeast Europe and Asia, by nature barbarists.
The vse of which obseruation, for the Commonweale,
may appeare by these two rules; First that ciuillRules of policy touching the nature of people.
nations, gouerned by lawes diuine and humane written,
may either be feared for enemies, or trusted for
friends in case they be neighbours, and of the same
Religion and of good abilitie. Secondly, that barbarous
people are neuer good faithfull friends, but for
their profit, being euer wauering and treacherous,
nor if enemies other than mortall; yet if their power
be not ouer-great, are easily vanquished.
         But the priuate vse that Trauailers must make to
themselues hereby,The priuate vse that Trauailers are to make. is to chase away such barbarousnesse
and rudenesse as possesseth them, to establish a
more humane and sociable carriage. For better discouerie
of these, let Trauailers marke the gesture, apparell,Meanes to interpret the nature of people. decencie, conuersation, diet, feeding, giuing of
honour, and all other actions of the people of a countrey,
one towards another; regarding. or contemning
all moral vices, with better iudgement than those fantastickes,
which bring home with them some apish
ceremonies of curtesie, and strange fashions of apparell,
but nothing else, to giue them commendations
at their returnes. It may not be vnknowen moreouer,
that there is no nation in the world but may be reduced
to ciuilitie, and forced in time to put off barbarousnesse,
seeing in all people God hath sowen the
seedes of that which is good,The difference of natures. within the furrowes and
fieldes of euery ones heart: which groweth more or
lesse according to the pleasure of the seedeman, manifested
in the proportioning of nature, whereof euery
climate hath a seuerall stroke, as being an instrument

whereby God frameth capabilitie more or lesse
to comprehend the same. Hence we see, those that inhabite
vnder the intemperate Zones hot or cold bee
more brutish, simple, and sauage than others between
the Tropicks, and in the temperate. So also it is to be
vnderstood, that no nation in the world, how Courtlike
soeuer, but hath the dregs and lees of barbarous
inciuility; and that many heathen people, by the light
of nature meerly inscribed in their hearts, rest for ensamples
and reproofes to many ciuill nations gouerned
by a diuiner knowledge, in points of ciuil actions
& conuersation. For proofe whereof,No nation but may be tainted with barbarous fashions. behold how the
English, Scottish, French, Italians, & Spanish which
are the most reformed & courtlike people, are tainted
with some blemish of barbarousnesse, the which of other
heathen nations they might learne to reforme.The consideration thereof.
And though of all ciuill nations we here may iustly
chalenge preeminence, yet how barbarous are we in
many things? namely, the Commons of this land, in
the entertainement of strangers, pursuing them with
the vncharitablenesse of hatred and despight, like the
Lithuanians, that vse neither faith nor ciuility to them.
Neither are we alone: for the Commons of France
and Spaine carie as hard a hand toward strangers;
whereas the African heathen Negros, are so charitable
to strangers, that nothing shall be denied them, if
it rest in their powers to relieue their distresse and
wants. In like sort are the people of the East India, so
respectiue of strangers, that the State deputeth certain
persons to supplie them with all things requisite: and
in case a stranger chance to die, the merchants of
their countrey shall haue deliuered vnto them their

goods. And verely of al reformed States, ther is none,
I iudge, more humane toward strangers at this day,
than are the Nobilitie of England, & of Polonia. What
vnciuisitie of manners and policie doth the Pope in
most of his regiments vse, forbidding marriage to
Priests? that which the Ethiopians, vpon the same inconuenience
politicke, permitted notwithstanding;
rather hazarding the incōuenience of remisnes & couetousnes,
than the mischiefe of many more horrible
sins. How vnseemly is the custome of the Frenchmen
toward their King, and ancients in nobility & yeers?
Short of that the Arabians attributed to euery ancient
in yeeres. Behold what great respect the Turkes, Tartarians,
and Persians giue to their Princes: in which
point the French come shortest. All men know how
sauage the Italians are toward their wiues by imprisoning,
cooping vp, & locking vp al, thorow the heat of
their ielous harts, though themselues are the most Libertines
thorow the world: And yet the Parthian heathen
are so courteous, ciuill & kind to their wiues, as
without manifest proofes, they wil not be ouer ielous
or suspicious. From whom I suppose the French haue
learned not a little renowne in that point, not trauailing
to presse down that, which like ye Palme tree, the
more it increaseth. Be not the Dutchmen most slouēly
and sluttish in their apparell, & feeding? wheras the
Africans detest the same, accounting bodily cleanlinesse
and honestie a point of dutie. And though the
Turks and Indians, & other Barbarians of Africk, and
the sauage out-lawes of many nations, eat their meat
on the ground, yet are they more neat & cleanly, than
those Dutchmen or our Irish. So the barbarousnesse

which of all other Nations possesseth those Dutchmen
except the Tartarians or Hell-hounds, which equally
account it an honour to be drunke) to eate, to
drinke, and become more vnciuill than beasts.
         It is not reprehended in the Scythians, that cruell
natiō: none daring to drink any wine, but such as the
King shall drinke vnto, and giue vnto; which is commonly
to those onely, that in times of watre haue killed
most of their enemies, and shed most blood. For
amongst them none are reputed valiant, but such as
haue caroused the blood of men. Doe not the Egyptians
refraine to eate or drinke more than sufficeth
nature? and that for good cause, seeing superfluitie of
meate breedeth all diseases, and many incurable. The
reparation of which abuse nature teacheth in the
Schoole of brute beastes. Hath not that enemie of
reason of those Dutchmen and Tartars infected the
greater number of our gallants, and those of ciuill
nations, since their conuerse in the Lowe Countreys?
In so much that at ordinary assemblies some striue to
be first and most drunke: others are compelled to the
like, against nature and manners, whereof many bitter
incouueniences haue growen: insomuch as I see
not why it should be a lesse matter for any that compels
another to drinke against his will, and thereby
mscarieth in health, than in forcing any to eate or
drinke poyson. And it is knowen, that vnder the
raigne of heathen Monarchs it was a law, at feasts not
to bee compelled to drinke more than euery man
pleased.
         The Italian, although in conuersation hee be not
offensiue, but obedient and humble to his superiour,

to his equall obseruant, to his inferior gentill and courteous,
amiable to strangers and swimming in complements
and louing tearmes, yet the least occasion dissolueth
auncient bonds of loue; so vnsteadie and
inconstant are they in ciuill offices noe lesse important
then the other. As it fareth with those that frequent
our Ordinaries, such as be gamesters, the least crossing
of whom, though great friends and companions other
waies, looseth the simmond of frendship compounded
in many places, and many yeares, at an instant. For,
such would haue the world know, the ciuilitie that is
in them cannot brooke vnciuilitie profered, without
risentiment in the highest nature. And, as in picking
of quarrells so in managing them, I thinke no nation
hath beene so rude in generall: For, whether
cause be proffered or no, or whether it stands men vpon
to make iust risentiment and seeke reparation for
iniurie, or indignitie, or whether such be in the right or
wrong, euerie man according to his fancie proceedeth,
or as the stare standes humorous. What Gothishe
barbarousnesse possesseth the Italians, in the pursuite of
their lust? What vnciuilitie and alluringnesse to lust, do
their Curtizans in gesture and apparell vse? And,
though the Tarnassariās (a people in habiting the Cost
of Bengala) neuer marrie women, before some white
Christian or Mawhometan haue cropped their Virginities,
yet afterwardes doe they carrie themselues
so ciuilly that the least inconstancie bringeth death on
such; not vnlike to an olde custome that the Nobilitie
of Scotland vsed in times past to leuie the Virginitie
of all such Maides as held of their Mannors:
and in case such were married before homage Virgineall

done, to their Lords they were subiect to great
fines. So by the like barbarous custome the chiefe sacrificing
Priest of Calecut, before the King would marrie
his Ladie, was enioyned to take the Assaie of the
Queene, and trie her Virginitie: for which acte the
king alwayes rewarded him with an hundred Crownes.
Yet wee see how detestable that barbarousnesse is amongst
other heathen people, that death is thought
to good for any Adulterer, or fornicator, or deflowrer
of Virgines. Moreouer, what inconstant luxuriousnesse
and superfluitie of vnciuilitie, in fashions and apparell,
toucheth the French; The which, except of vs English,
is reproued of most Nations in the world.
         And amongst many barbarousnesses of manners,
how strange is that of the French mens dissimulation
to their verie friends? The which is left also hereditarie
from the Lumbards to the Italians that haue
any education.
         I feare me, other Nations trauailing thither will say
that we beginne to smell of that disease. Lastly, what
fencerlike and gladiatorious behauiour bemaddeth the
Germanes? What corruption of mannes generaly
reigne in the Italians? Insomuch that other lesse accort
Countries then ours haue this cōmon prouerbe, wherof
it shall suffice to touch that of the Germanes;

               Multi Germani rustici
               In Italiam proficiscuntur angeli;
               Redeunt diaboli vrbani.
            
What inconstant countenance, do these Italians sauor
of? What arrogancie and insolencie discouereth the
Spaniard to his superior and equall; what insupporrablenesse

to his inferior and subiect? What falsehoods
may men finde in the Gelderlanders? whereas Turkes
being Heathens are keepers of promise. What crueltie
and tyrannie do the Spaniards and Irish discouer to
their enemies? What pride of the French? What pertinacitie
generally do Schollers, Courtiers, and Souldiers
discouer? What inhospitalitie do the Germanes
keepe? What anger and hastinesse of the Irish? yea of
the poorest kerne.
         Thus, by these examples, may a Trauailer suruey
the ciuilitie and barbarousnesse of Nations, in euerie
vertue actiue or morall;The place of Ciuilitie and Barbarousnes. chiefly in the Court and
Citties. For the Countrie people rellish of rudenesse
euermore; though in some points they may serue for
samplers of great ciuilitie, and true carriages, of the
which a trauailer must in particular make obseruance.
But considering, that which is Ciuilitie in one Nation
is vnaccustomed and reiected in other State; it may
be doubted how a Trauailer shall demeane himselfe
to be compleat,Touching the varietie of manners what trauailers are to obserue and follow. and know which to retaine. The answere
is easie: for it is euer presupposed, that it is no
breach of office or of ciuilitie being in another
Nation to obserue the fashions, guises and customes,
of the same, in things indifferent and ceremoniall, although
they grate on barbarisme; as superfluitie of
complements and words, such as the French and Italians vse,
the manner of eating and drinking, whether
vppon the ground lying along, as in Turkie and
Africke, or standing: The manner of saluting with the
hatte on without bending of the knee, without bowing
of the bodie, without imbracing, without profering
of the hand, without conioyning, without kissing

and such like externall customes of indifferencie,
becomming well enough the boundes of euerie Countrie.
For, though it be a rule with vs that those ceremonies,
and ciuill vses come neérest to the point of true
cariage, and consequently most commendable, that expresse
humilitie, and curtesie, and encrease affection of
most kindnesse and humanitie (hence comes our salutations
bareheaded, and hand kissing, bowed bodies and
knees, embracings, conioyning and shaking of the
hand, peculiar to great personages; hence the Italians
and French haue gotten probatum of their humilious
phrases and kind complements of kissing their hands;
the Spaniardes of humbly kissing the hands of those
they respect and conuerse with, men as women, the
Dutch in their carrowsing in like sort as we vse, in contracts
by imposition of hands and afterwards by kissing
them) yet we see the nature of the Italians cānot brooke
kissing openly of women, nor the French being long
bareheaded; and in like expressions other Nations are
as precise. Notwithstanding, in the expressions of moral
vertues and vices, a Trauailer must be so curious
and graue, that hee not only beware to committe
sinne and do as the people do, but cleaue wholly to
the vertue and meane of things, abhorring blaspheming,
swearing, rayling, malreporting, and such
like vices of the tongue, as of all other actions and
customes of wickednesse which are euill in their
owne nature, without circumstances. And these
Trauailers haue prerogatiue of other Nations to
prescribe against many though indifferent and against
all euill customes, that swarue from the rule of Nature
& humanitie. Thus hauing long stayed vpon this haunt

of the first discouerer of the nature of people,The second discouerer of the peoples nature. the second
offereth it self, for the Trauailer to know; Whether
the people be Free or Seruile. For al people considered
as Subiects are one of these two.Freedome or seruilenesse politicall. And though
by nature largely cōsidered, one man is equally so free
as another; none more seruile (for seruitude is politicke)
yet we see some people politickly seruile as free,
some more, some lesse, according to the alteration of
times and things. By the words seruile & free then are
meant, not the naturall (since all by nature are seruile
to sinne and vnrighteousnesse, and are equally free
from miserie and subiection) but the politicall, which
maketh some people free, in regard of misery and seruitude,
and other seruile to slauery, miserie, and subiection.
Now seeing all people of a State are vnder
subiection in generalitie, in this place the nature of a
people must bee sought out of such as are free from
slauery and miserie,Freedome frō slauery and misery. and of those that are seruiled vnto
them. Of people free in this sense, there be some
by prescription enfranchised,By prescriptiō. the gouernment of
whose States by good lawes haue made them free
from long miserie or slauery: Such are the Commons
and Nobilitie of this land, whose freedome is such, as
they enioy their owne things so freely as the Prince.
The like may be sayd of the States of France and Germanie,
and of other well ordered Common wealths.
Moreouer, such freedome generally reigneth in
France, as with vs here in Kent, that what slaue or
bondman shal but land in France, is immediatly made
free: and whosoeuer abideth one yeere in Kent, shall
be euer after enfranchised. Moreouer, there be others
free by arrogation,By arrogation▪ who according to the state of

times and things licentiously vse their libertie. Such
in times past were the people of Denmarke: whose
force was their law, in so much that their Prince held
his royaltie at their placitum. For, if at any time they
misliked any of his actions he was instantly deposed,
and an other set in his place. Such at this day is the
freedome of the Venetians, that they seeme to beare
a hard hand ouer their Dukes. And such is the common
nature of euery Democracie and Aristocracie.
Lastly,By policie. there bee some whose policie and state haue
continued them in much freedome from miserie and
slauerie, as euer striuing against seruitude. Such were
the Sclauonians, the Switzers, and the Lumbards,
the Neapolitanes, in the Romane gouernement: in
so much as these people being euer confederates
with that mightie Empire, yet durst they giue succour
to the banished from Rome. Such were the Hungarians
against the Turke.
         Such generally are the Nobility of most Christian
States, who as Libertines are euer out of tyranny, before
the Cōmons. Such are the Spaniards that chuse
rather to die than to be made slaues. And such is the
naturall affect of those that either haue enioyed long
freedom, or feele sensibly the hard yoke of bondage.
In a word,Ciuilitie the meanes to obedience. such are the people of Ireland, who not being
accustomed to ciuility and obeisance, spurne so
much against the same: For, the Nobility spurn against
subiection; & the Cōmons folow their Lords & Leaders,
thorow want of ciuility & Christian knowledge
that keepeth euery man in officio. The markes of liberty
and freedome of people are riches & ease; both peculiar
to the Grecians and English; the Germanes abound

in ease: the Venetians procure their liberty by
their riches.
         These things cōcerning the freenesse of people. The
like in effect be considered of those people which are
seruile; namely,Seruitude, two fold. whether they be seruiled thorow tyranny
& oppression, or thorow depression & keeping
vnder violently; both sorts being subiects of misery
& calamitie. Of the first sort,1. By oppression. we heare of the Tartariās
vnder their Cam; for the whole State of all they haue
standeth at his fancie to dispose of: the word of whose
mouth serueth for a sword to reuenge him of rebels,
and yet they reioyce thereat; neither dare any man
say, This is mine, or anothers: neither can any man
dwell other-where than his Lord assigneth him. The
Liuonians vnder the Duke of Muscouie are so seruile,
that they dare not but call him Tzar, or King; where
none other nations doe the same. Moreouer, so seruile
are the Muscouites, that they call themselues the
slaues of the Duke: neither dare they sell anything,
before the Dukes officers haue surueyed the same. Alike
seruile are the people of Lithuania, in so much as
the officers of the Countrey may enter into any mans
house, and take their pleasure of any thing; where no
farmer dare come in the presence of this Lord, without
gifts or bribes. So the Commons of Sweuia in times
past were in great misery vpheld by their Princes and
Nobilitie: For, all commodities passed and repassed
thorowe their fingers. Lastly, such are those people,
whose ouer-rulers are Tyrants, as the Turke generally
thorow his Dominions; the Pope ouer the
Cleargie, and many temporall States. Nowe of
the second sort of Seruile,By depression, wee find the husbandmen

and tenants of Italie, who liue hardly and poorely to
vphold the Gentlemen their Land-lords. So liue the
Boores vnder the Germane Nobilitie, in greater miserie
and subiection, than the poorest person in this
land. Such are moreouer the Commons of a Nation
where either ciuill warres, or omission of good and
holesome lawes reigne. Such of late time were the
Boores of the Low Countries, and Pesants of France:
so finally are al those Commons whose Nobility like
Solons great flies breake thorow the net of the Lawe,
and where the Prince is remisse in gouernment.
         Now the markes of seruile people are hereby gathered,The markes of seruitude.
namely, Pouertie and Want, and excessiue
paines-taking and moyling to gaine their liuing. Such
were the Irish: such are the Moores.
         It now remaines to shew what vse a Trauailer shall
make hereby. First,Rules of policy touching the same, by these, the loyaltie and vnsteadinesse
of Subiects are discouered: then their constancie
and reuolting humor vpon occasions profered.
And lastly, who are to be trusted for friends, and
who feared for enemies: These being instruments
for the Politician to plot vpon; and therefore I will be
sparing in the discourse.
         The third thing that discouereth the nature of the
people is for our Trauailer to consider,The third discouerer of the peoples nature whether the
people of a Nation or State bee Religious,Religiousnesse or Profanenesse. or Profane.
These wordes must be restrained; considering
Religiousnesse is properly taken for the godly exercise
of that profession, without Idolatrie or superstition,
the which is true Religion. All other shewes are
shadowes irreligious, and not substantiall professions.
In like sort may it be said of Profanenesse: which is of

those people who leauing the pathe of mans dutie toward
God wander in the field or wildernesse of error,
either through ignorance, presumption, or imperfectiō.
Wherefore, that our Trauailer may not bee put to
plunge, the words in this place implie a larger vnderstanding.
For, by religious people is meant,What is ment by these words such as are
passing deuoute and zealous in religion, be they Christian,
Heathen, or Antichistian. So likewise by prophane
people I conceiue Libertines, Atheistes, and politicke
religious people, who oppose themselues against
the superstitious and deuout practise of godlinesse: as
temporizers aud epicureall worldlings. In this first sense
most Nations in the world at this day are & haue been
euer deuoute and religious: some in the truth, as the
true people of Israell, and all such Christian people
as of the certaintie of the Scriptures and worde of
God do serue the Lord as hee commaundeth, reiecting
humane traditions and superstitiousnesse, as prophanenesse
politique and damnable. Heereupon rose that
worthie custome of the Nobilitie of Poland, whensoeuer
the Gospell was a reading in their Churches, To
draw out their swords, signifying, that they were readie
to defend the truth thereof, if any durst oppugne the
same.
         And hence no doubt at the first sprang our custome
heere in England, of standing on our feete and rising
vp, when the Articles of our faith either are a reading,
or during the reading of the Gospell; thereby
expressing that by this wee will stand and abide against
the world and other like ceremonies, which superstitiō
I feare hath corrupted. Heereupon, are the Saxons
noted to bee verie deuout, but withall opinionatiue.

So are the Bohemians deuout and zealous withall.
         Moreouer,Religious in Idolatrie and superstition. some are religious in idolatrie: as were
the Egyptians, the Assyrians, Philistines, and those vncircumcised
people that worshipped strange GODS.
Such are at this day the barbarous people of the East
and West Indies, that worship the vgly shapes of Diuels,
of the Sunne, Moone, Starres, of the Elements & of
other Creatures. Others there are deuout in superstitiō:
as the Turkes and Persians, who with much deuotion
are trained vp vnder the policie of their Prophets Mahomet
and Haly. Lastly, there are some blinded wonderfully
in Idolatrie & superstition: such are the Popelings
and those that goe vnder the name of Catholickes,
but abusiuely. The which religious proceeding
is so hatefull to those that follow the Greeke Church,
but singularly to the Muscouites, that if any of their
Nation bee but reputed to haue spoken with a Latine
or Romane, it behooueth him to bee purged,
before hee shall bee intertained and receiued to partake
of the Communion: for they accompt such polluted.
         The verie like may a Trauailer consider of the people,
which be profane: such as the Epicures and Temporizers
are that florish singularly in Italie. And according
as it hath beene reported of the Normans in times
past, that they cared little for any of Gods seruice: So,
the Romanes profanenesse, and contempt of vertue euerie
Nation is full of; Like as it hath beene spoken
of the Cicilians, that they regard no man whilest they
themselues are in prosperitie.
         Thus a Trauailer may referre vnto his proper head
the nature of the people concerning religiousnesse or

profanenesse, the which may in generalitie and in particular
stand him in much stead. Moreouer, I suppose
it also very needfull for a Trauailer,A consideratiō. to consider whether
the people Religious or Profane so stand, by the
omission or want of lawes, or by the seueritie of
Lawes or customes. For, though religion cannot be
constrained, yet it may bee restrained by ordinances,
so as a Trauailer shall hardly discerne it. Hence
wee see the Nobilitie of France passing deuoute of
Custome, the Gascoignes religious without superstition,
our Commons in times past verie superstitious:
as generally are all that bee newly weaned from
poperie. Thus much as concerning the religiousnesse
or profanenesse of people.The fourth discouerer of the peoples nature. A triple consideration of warlike or effeminatenes. The fourth resteth to be
considered: whether the people of a Nation bee
Warlike or Effeminate: Whereof let a Trauailer
ground his obseruation vnder these three heads: namely,
whether the people be effeminate or warlike through
naturall complexion. Hence wee diuine all phlegmatickes
and sanguinistes effeminate by nature; as all melancholickes
and cholerickes warlike. Secondly, whether
the people be effeminate for want of good discipline,
as commonly those are where either vices, or
great excesse abound; these being great withdrawers
of mens courages, weakening and poisoning the
powers of soule and body, so as without discipline
such men are vnapt for the warres altogether. Lastly,
whether the people be warlike through the feare of Tyrannie,
or by good discipline. For as discipline maketh
some that naturally are cowardes and phlegmatickes
good soldiers in time: so want of discipline we see
giues the reignes of exces to breed vices & corruptiō of

hearts, and enfeebling of mindes otherwise of good
temper for the warres: such are the sanguinistes. And
as the excesse of commodities in a land make men idle,
so the barrennesse enforceth others to be industrious,
which is one of the best discouerers of a warlike people.
Hereof it came to passe, that the Sicilians haue been noted
for cowards and effeminate; whereas the inhabitants
of the mountains and Alpes, haue euer carried the
name of hardie & warlike. The like some haue obserued
in the Lowe Countrie people, till discipline and feare of
tyrannie procured them some choler. Wee reade of
the Lithuanians for want of good discipline to be so effeminate
and cowardly, that they neuer goe to the
warres willingly: and oftentimes being prest giue great
summes of money to be released from the seruice. So in
times past (as Eusebius reciteth) were the people of Africke
so effeminate and faineants that the women did
euerie thing abroad for marchandize and husbandrie:
as it hath been reported of the men of Holland that were
wont to carrie their fardels on their heads, whereas the
women did carrie their burdens vnder their Armes.
Yet so warlike were, by the same ground, the Denmarks,
that going to the warres the souldiers would neuer abandon
their leaders, but die in the field rather then flie
so long as their Leaders liued: it being moreouer an infamie
reputed for souldiers to die in their beddes, or of
other sickenesses then that which commeth by warres.
Herby also we finde the valiancie of the Switzers according
to their discipline: whereas the Arabians and
Asiaticques are tainted with cowardize. The English
likewise are feared of all men for their valiancie, euen
as the Hungarians are reputed hardie and stoute. In so

much that they haue beene branded for grayhoundes &
wolues in regard of other Nations but Hares and Foxes;
Whereas the people of little Britaine haue been
esteemed timorous, especially where they bee opposed
by the English: in like sort were those of Picardie.
         Lastly, do not all men see heere in England, in Scotland,
in France, in Italie, Spaine, and Germanie, that
these things do alter the people from warlikenesse to effeminatenes:
and contrariwise good & long discipline
are meanes to recouer their ancient glorie? whereby a
Trauailer shall not only discouer the present estate of
things, but be able with the politician to diuine into
what chaunces such people may fall.
         The fift and last discouerer of the nature now remaineth,The fift discouerer of the peoples nature,
for a Trauailer to make obseruation, namely: of
what Condition of bodie and Disposition of minde the
people be of.
         As touching the condition of bodie,The peoples condition discernable in three things. Three
things are to be respected: First, the Stature; whether
tall, lowe, or of meane size of person, Secondly,
of what complexion: whether faire, browne,
blacke, tawnie, fatte, leane, slender, or well limmed;
whether deformed or mōstrous in nature, hauing more
or lesse limmes, then the common sort of people and
such like: which for breuitie sake by examples I
passe ouer. Thirdly, whether the people bee long 
or short liued, and whether healthie or sickelie, and
whether great feeders and drinkers, or not: The vses
whereof being common, I passe them ouer. In like
sort for the inclination and disposition of the peoples
mindes,The peoples inclination discouered in foure points. foure things are to be considered. First,
whether the people bee giuen to idlenesse or paines

taking; then, to what occupations and trades they are
accustomed. Thirdly, whether they bee addicted to
letters, or otherwise incurious of learning: Lastly,
what vices and vertues the people are most giuen vnto;
and that whether by defect or administration of lawes,
or by their own temperatures. The least of these are of
moment to be vnderstood. For besides the particular
profit that euerie Trauailer shal reape thereby, there is a
publike and multiplex of stuffe for such (if so they happily
afterward step to the helm and be called to aide the
motion therof) to worke vpon, either to reforme euils
in their own Common-weale, or to mooue commotion
or pacification twixt forraine Powers and nations.
Which, for that these are the materials of politicians, I
omit to explane how and in what sort. And forasmuch
as the nature of people in this point may be the better
discouered in particular, I propounde foure Censures,
which open the verie affects of the heart, vnto such as
couet to know in particular the secrets of euerie ones
minde,Foure bewrayers of mens affections to vice or vertue. in common actions expressing vertue or vice;
They are the exercises, the diet, the apparel, and the conuersation
of men: of which, if we may not offend, we will
consider a little, how & in what manner they may stand
a Trauailer in stead either to establish peace, or to entertaine
war, in case of imployment. First then, of exercises
some be honorable,Exercises tripe others for pastime and recreation.
Such as follow the honorable, whether warlike or of
learning, discouer good instruments of peace or warre.
For, as by the exercises of warre men shew couragious
and high mindes, spirited and strong bodies: so
by exercising points of learning and knowledge, honest
and settled mindes are bewraied; and consequently

meete persons, the one for peace the other for warres.
Those, that exercise for pastime and delight only, are
marked for corrupt, and weake members in a State, eithe
for peace or warre: yet rather affecting peace then
warre.
         The second Censure is the diet of men. Diet,Diet triple. it is
either of meate, of drinke, or of sleepe. Those that
be Epicures in any of these three, are to be taxed for
the most part for slouthfull, vitious and effeminate
bodies. Those that be temperate in these three, and
accustome their bodies to endure hardnesse, may be obserued
for men of action and employment: and as these
may prooue good instruments for warre, so the other
are scarce good for either.
         The apparell reuealeth like affections; which consisteth
either in the fashion,A triple consideration of apparell. or stuffe, or colour. Those
that keepe the fashion which is approued in the Court,
if they be Courtiers, shew discretion and constancie.
Where, on the other side, they bewraie lightnesse and
ficklenesse, vnlesse in speciall cases. So doe all those
that affect vneasie and vnhandsome fashions. Those
moreouer are not euer the wisest that are first in the
newe fashion, but such rather that come in the
taile; if they doe it in this respect, to see first whether
the same bee better and more necessarie then the
olde. But seeing fewe Nations in the World be variable
in fashions but wee and the French, I will shut
vp this point, that there is a meete fashion for Courtiers,
for souldiers, and for other people, necessarily
distinct. For, the Courtier respecteth comelinesse,
the soldier ease and warmth, the rest are variable; according
as they stand in yeares, or humors, or necessitie.

As concerning the state of apparell: Whosoeuer weareth
not good apparel, being a Courtier, and in Court,
beseeming this Estate and being young, discouers his
discontentment or want of meanes: so they that goe
more costly then the guise of the place or their habilitie
can beare withall, or not respecting times, places
and persons, reuealeth vanitie and hautie Ambition.
The like affections are bewraied by the third, to
weet the Colour; it being for the most part generally
through the world respected for a Concordance according
to the fitnesse of yeares, of persons, of times, &
places; the which are circumstances reuealing the affections
or imperfections of men in the colours of their
apparell.
         The last Censurer is the Conuersation of men,Conuersation. with
the vertuous or vitious; whereby the secret carriages of
the minde be discouered. For, as those that keepe euill
companie bewray imperfect mindes: so such as conuerse
with the vertuous may be obserued for honest and
trustie men to be imployed in the affaires of their common-wealth,
either for peace or warre, if other things
concurre withall. In which conuersation an eye must
be had of such to discerne, what wisedome, valour,
temperancie, liberalitie, vprightnesse, couragiousnesse
of minde euerie one of the nobler sort in his actions
discouers: and contrariwise of the vices and capitall euils
that reigne in them. But of these wee haue opened
enough: and also concerning the nature of the people:The third point of knowledge. The suruay of the Country.
it now remaineth to speake of the thirde point of
knowledge about which a Trauailer must busie himselfe,
in the interim of his Trauaile: namely, in the
suruey of the Countrie wherein he shall trauaile. But

seeing the consideration hereof is multiplex, it would
be to many very tedious to handle euery species and
subdiuision largely. Wherefore we will but make
a discouerie, & touch onely the most necessary things
to be vnderstood.
         Of the Countrey there is a sixefold consideration:In sixe points principally.
as first of the name, to weet; wherof the Countries or
Cōmon-weales name hath his deriuation;1. Name. how many
sundry names it hath had since the first habitation
thereof; and finally how long it hath continued in
each name, & what were the causes of alteration. The
which things forasmuch as frō records they may be
collected, we wil not insist vpon them: adding only by
way of implicatiō one vse hereof, That such Cōmon-weales
as neuer haue altered their names, will hardly
be subdued, or brought vnder the yoke of an absolute
Conquerer: whereas those that haue been accustomed
to change their names, may easily by Conquerers
be perswaded to suffer a change. The second
consideration is of the populousnesse or scarcitie of
people;2. Populousnes the knowledge whereof is so auaileable, as
a Politician cannot well plot, without good certificate
thereof from time to time: for a multitude of
people cannot well indure without much trafficke,
without many friends; and in case of penurie, death,
and want, not well without disorder. Neither are a
few people to be feared for great enemies, or to be
trusted for constant friends,3. Situation. and such like. Thirdly, of
the situation of the Countrie, in regard of the earth
and seas, as of the heauens; namely, vnder what Climate
it lieth, and what signe doth patronize the same.
But these things, being they may be attained vnto by

reading & perusing of Mappes and sea Charts, let it be
sufficient to vs to haue remembred them.4. Qantity. Fourthly,
the quantitie (which is either of the length, breadth,
circuit, or figure of the Countrey) is to bee considered.
The which also wee omitte to enlarge by discourse,
considering by the rules of Geometrie and
Cosmographie, any may easily attaine to the same.
Onely let this not bee impertinent to be superadded,
how the marches of the countrey (if it be part of the
Continent) is confronted with naturall defence or
artificiall; how it borders on other Countreys, and
what quarter there is kept ordinarily, whereof in
the sixt and last generall point of knowledge, namely,
in the secrets of the State wee shall haue cause to
treate.5. Commodities, The fift consideration is to bee made of the
commodities to bee found in the Countrey: And
the sixt likewise of the discommodities. Of these
two last we will dilate a little. First, a Trauailer shall
obserue the commodities of a Countrey, either as
they stand naturally or artificially.
         The naturall commodities are foure: namely,Naturall commodities foure the
goodnesse or temperatenesse of the Ayre, the Fruitfulnesse
of the soyle, the plenty of Riuers and Ports
(if the same coast the sea): And lastly, the Springs,
Lakes, Baths, Spawes, or Pooles, that haue any
singular vertue in them.
         Touching the first,
               . Temperate ayre. let not a Trauailer weigh the
goodnesse or temperatenesse of the ayre by his own
constitution of body, that peraduenture can away
well with the same, (as wee see some of our English
bodies can away well enough in colde Moscouia, others
in hot Morea) but by the generall well-faring

of the inhabitants without pestiferous diseases and
accidents, that seldome chaunce to that Land and
people, but extraordinarily. For, by the secret
worke of God, there is no Nation so temperate, but
is subiect to corruption of Ayre, when his secret
will shall bee displeased therewith, and that by the
reuolution of the heauens, and of things ingendred
and conteined in them.
         Touching the second,2 Fruitfulnesse of the soyle. which is the Fruitfulnesse of
the soyle, there is a triple consideration; either of
such as mooue and growe vpon the superficies of the
Land (as Vegetables, and liuing sensible things) or of
such things as are hid in the wombe and veines of
the earth, or of the molde it selfe. Touching the
first of these, let Trauailers obserue what store there
is found of irrationall Animals, either wilde or domesticke,
seruing for the vse of man; and especially
whether the Countrey doe yeeld a superfluitie; and
whereof. As in generalitie, Africk yeeldeth the best
Mules; Europe the best Lions, as Herodotus and Plinie
make report, onely to bee found betweene the
riuers Nestus and Achelous; the one coasting Abdera,
a Citie of Thrace; the other, being a flood of
Epyrus, separateth Acarnania from Aetolia. So
in particular, wee finde England yeeldeth the greatest
store of good Sheepe and Wooll: Muscouia the
best Bees; yeelding Honie and Wake in plentie; and
the best Furres. Moreouer, let a Trauailer obserue
what store of Vegetables, either of Woods, Trees
for fruite, or plants the Countrey yeeldeth. For,
euery Countrey hath his seuerall Commodities, and
singularitie of them, fitted by the prouidence of God:

as we reade of, in Asia, singular Cedars and Pine trees:
so wee haue experience, that for Firre trees and shipmasts,
Denmarke and the New found land is notorious;
for Vines, France; for Apples and such ordinary
fruit England; for Orenges, Limons, Pomegranates
and such like, Spaine and other hot Countries; for oyle
and Oliues, Candia, &c. As concerning the second,
which is of things hid in the veines and wombe of
the earth (for what shall we need to enlarge the discourse
with the huge woods to be found in Germany
and Bohemia, or with the notorious Vegetables of other
Nations) namely, the Mines of mettals and
Fossiles whereof there are such sundrie species, as it
may seeme impertinent of vs to be further touched,
considering so soone as they are discouered, they bee
committed to writing. Now the last of those three
is the fruitfulnesse of the molde, yeelding vnto the industry
of such people as Till and manure the same,
abundance of all things: the which also we wil referre
to the artificiall consideration of the Countries commodities.
         The third naturall commodities of a countrey are
the plentie of Riuers and Ports:3. Plenty of Riuers, whereof these things
fall to the obseruation of a Trauailer; From whence
they haue their springs & thorowfare if they be riuers
nauigable, whether they be replenished with fish, of
what kindes, and whether potable and commodious
for the vse of man, how these doe accommodate the
Country; and lastly where they haue bridges, foords,
ferries, or may bee waded ouer. But if the Countrey
be maretine, and ioyning to the sea, what, and what
store of fish the coast aboundeth with; how the sea

ebbeth and floweth in euery Port and Creeke, where
there is good riding for shippes or boates; what shallowes,
sands and flattes; and lastly, what good and
dangerous landing; whereof in the secrets and last
part of the Trauailers knowledge we shall haue occasion
to enlarge. But a Trauailer must be so prudent
in searching out these things, that he haue not a malicious
or suspicious eye cast on him; for it is one of
the conuictors of Spies.4. Springs and Baths. Now the last of the naturall
commodities, as wee haue sayd, are Springs, Baths,
Spawes, Lakes, Pooles, or other things of goodnesse
and medicineable vertue and commoditie: the which
are to be sought out in seuen things, namely, in their
heat, as Baths and Spawes: in their tastes and sauours,
as Plinie reporteth of a certaine Lake amongst the
Troglodites, which thrise a day and thrise a night, for
a season, was euer bitter and salt, and at other times
sweete. Thirdly, in their colour, as Diodorus reporteth,
in Egypt there was a Poole, the colour of whose
water was vermilion, which being drunke would
make men bewray secrets. Fourthly, in their odour
or smel, as that fountaine in the Citie Leuca, of a most
horrible smel, spoken of by Strabo. Fiftly, in the motion,
at what time they are rising: as that fountaine
besides Haslea which neuer riseth but early in the morning,
at high noone, and at the shutting in of the euening:
And if therein any euill thing bee cast that
may corrupt the same, Theodorus Zuingerus mentioneth,
that for certaine dayes after it will not rise at all.
Sixtly, in their effects, as that fountaine of Salmac in
the countrey of Caria; which, as Strabo writeth, maketh
men effeminate & lither. That of Aphrodisium in

Pyrrhea, that causeth barrennesse, as Plinie noteth,
and such like. And lastly, what commoditie either of
them yeelde vnto the Countrey, the which chiefly
is to be considered, of those nauigable Lakes that lie
in the heart of the Land.
         Hitherto concerning the naturall:Artificial commodities▪ two, the Artificiall
commodities now offer themselues; which a Trauailer
shall find chiefly in two things, namely, in Buildings
or in Trades & Sciēces Mechanick. And though
the liberall Arts may seeme to bee of the number; yet
properly they are not the commodities of a Land or
State. Because by the word Commodities is meant,
things that may be transported from State to State, &
caried out of one country into another: which the liberall
Sciences well cannot saue in bookes: For the
operatiō of the liberal Sciēces seem to be Spiritual or
Mathematical; wheras that of Mechanical arts sheweth
to be corporal. But to our point,1. Buildings triply considered. of Buildings there
may be a triple cōsideration: First, what are the most
cōmon buildings & houses of the country wherin the
common people inhabite, and of what stuffe they are
made. For almost euery countrey differ therin. But
whersoeuer great defects are of these, as in Ireland,
Muscouie & other places, it is a note of pouerty & barbarousnes.
Secondly, what manner of buildings are
those of Towns & Cities, & of the nobler sort of people:
for these euermore draw neerest to ciuility, and
be freest from pouerty. Lastly, what is the Architecturie
of Forts, Townes, Sconces, Cittadels, Castles,
Towers, and of places fortified in the land, about the
discouery whereof a trauailer shall finde much vse
of his Mathematickes, learned before trauaile. But

before wee make discouery of places fortified, let it
not bee impertinent to consider seuen points briefly
in Cities or Townes: as first of the Quantities,Seuen obseruations in Cities and Townes. Figures
and Circuits as well of the Cities themselues,
as of their suburbes. Secondly, of their situation and
strength, and how they stand commodated by sea
or land, or discommodated. Thirdly, of the manner
and matter of their buildings. Fourthly, of their places
and things of speciall note, as Gates, Fountaines
Bridges, Churches, Streets, Religous houses, palaces
Arsenals, Store houses Market places, Rialtos, publike
Ambulatories, Schooles, Libraries, Colledges, Vniuersities,
and such like. Moreouer, of Vniuersities it
must be considered, whether they bee of Physicke,
of the Lawe, or of any other speciall studie and profession,
or mixt of all liberall Sciences together,
what number of Students, what companies of strangers,
their orders, priuiledges, and such like: lastly,
what famous men in learning flourish in them. Fiftly,
the number of the people of the Cities & Townes
are to be learned so neere as may be. Sixtly, the policie
of them is to be regarded: which resteth either in
the Ecclesiasticall, Scholastical, Oeconomical, or politicall
gouernment: whereof the politicall is most
behooueful, and therfore we will insist only vpon the
same; and that in one word to discerne the maner and
disposition of the peoples liuing, whether in idlenesse
and pleasure, as the Nobilitie of this Land, and of
France, or in trades and merchandise, as the Nobility
of the Venetian and Genoa States. Moreouer,
with whom they vent that which is superfluous in
their Towne, from what other places they ordinarily

bring such things as they want and stand in need of:
and whether they be driuen to carie out their owne
commodities, or are sought vnto by forreine parts;
Let these things suffice, till the gouernement of the
State in generall shall offer it selfe to be handled in the
fift part, to which we do referre Trauailers that make
doubt of any thing considerable in Townes or Cities.
The seuenth and last consideration then of Cities
is of the priuiledges, immunities, liberties, and freedomes
of them: whether Colonies, Municipials,
Prefectures, Cities confederate, assemblies, and such
like. Now the other part of Artificiall buildings resteth
to our Trauailer,How the secret of places fortified may bee discouered. namely, of fortifications. Of
which, forasmuch as the true suruey of them is in
many States very daungerous, we haue obserued, for
the better ease and securitie of Trauailers, three safe
wayes to prie into the secrets of them if accesse bee
inhibited: First, to learne what are fortified holdes
within the land, and what front and coast the sea, and
where seated. Moreouer, within the land, whether
they stand vpon riuers, or waters, or were built for other
purposes than for the warres, and naturall defence
of the land: whereof in most States there haue
been diuerserected, as by the Nobilitie of England
and Ireland for their priuate vses, and for ciuill warres
fortified, & singularly in France, where the Noblesses
for their priuate safegard, haue many strong holdes:
as other Nations that a long season haue either feared
enemies,A consideratiō of the naturall and of the artificial strengths of fortifications. or sought freedome from subiection.
Whereof wee haue of late time experience, by the
fortifications of the Lowe Countrey people. The second
considereth the naturall and artificiall strength

of them: The naturall attribute defence vnto a place
in regard of situation: which may be cōsidered in hils,
rockes, or waters that make the same vnaccessable or
defenceable, wherof we haue a wonderful example in
the Isle of Sarke in our Brutish sea, which is by nature
so fortified, as one man may defend the same Isle against
the greatest Army that is able to come against
it. Of like defence is in some respect the castle of Garnsey,
& for a land Army the city of Venice, and of Mexico
in West India. Moreouer, let it be considered, whether
equally in all places as the aforenamed, or but on
some sides that defence groweth, as that of Douer, castle
to the sea-ward, and towards the towne. Likewise
what other naturall strengths be within, as plenty of
ground to preserue victuall, good springs that cannot
be withdrawen or corrupted, & such like, which naturally
doe fortifie places greatly in times of besiegings.
Now th'artificial strēgths of Forts cōsisteth in ye Matter
or Forme and figure, whether without or within.
Touching the matter & substāce of euery particular,
let it be questioned whether they be of old or new erectiō:
for the olde in times past were made of stone,
bricke, or such like hard stuffe, which now in the perfectiō
of artillery are more easie to be battered thā Forts
of earth, & are foūd more hurtful to the friend within,
& fauorable to the enemy; yet in speciall cases where
Artillery cannot come to batter, are notwithstanding
momentable: the which if it be well considered, seldome
shall men find old fortifications, but they were
euen seated so, as Artillery could not play vpon them.
In like sort are those new fortifications to be considered,
of what matter (for of earth ther is diuers sorts to

make good fortifications) of what greatnes, largenes,
thicknes, depth, and height are the members of them:
as wals, vammures, ramparts, curtins, cauallirs, parapets,
counterscarfes, mounts, platforms, trenches, ditches,
&c, and how replenished with water, what sluces,
what Saleis, what droit and oblique passages are
to the same: the which, discreet questioning, & good
indgement of the eye, shall enforme a Trauailer of.
Touching the formes and figures of Forts, that is either
regular or irregular. The regular be either Rotunds,
Quadrats, Pentagonons, Hexagonons, &c. according
to the quantity of the Fort, euery part answering
in correspondencie. The irregular retain those formes
which most naturally may helpe the weaknes of the
place, yet answerable one to another, according to the
rules of fortifications: wherof we had a notable piece
of work for example, in that in Ostend in Flanders. And
for better iudgement herein, let it not be grieuous to
any Trauailer, if so he happen into the warres, to obserue
the notable means is taken in the field by good
Souldiers for the fortifying of their Campes daily after
this irregular distribution. Now the last of these 3,
that prie into the fortifications of Countries, is to vnderstād
what Captains & souldiers ordinarily belong
to them; their munitions, their paies, & finally their
ordinances & priuiledges. Let these things suffice for
the first of the artifical commodities of the Country.
         The second is that of Trades,2, Trades, Mechanick sciences sixe, and Mechanical Sciences;
the which are fashioners and finishers of handicraft
works made through mans inuention, & are in
number sixe, for a Trauailer to consider of; thorow
which al commodities passe and repasse, namely, Husbandry,

Clothing, Masonry, Carpentry, Smithery, & Engining:
these are generall heads, whereunto all other
trades of necessary obseruation may be referred, that
accommodate a Land. Let vs take Husbandry for an
example, vnder which is comprised the sciences of
gardening, of planting and grafting, of manuring, of
grasing, of breeding and cherishing of Vegetables,
Plants, beasts, and such like fostering sciences, for the
nourishment of the creatures, but singularly of man:
Vpon which also other infinite trades depend, wherof
we will omit to speake.Husbandry discoured in three points. But to our point in hand; a
Trauailer shal discerne the husbandry of each countrey
in three points: first, by obseruing what corne
and graine the countrey yeeldeth generally, and that
with what paines and meanes the land is tilled and
manured, what vsuall increase the land yeeldeth, and
such like: whereof there is such difference as is almost
incredible, yea, between setting and sowing. Secondly,
what cattell are vsually bred there for the state
aswell of the Land as of other Countries. As in Muscouie
and Poland, Bees; in the Lowe Countries, Kine;
in England, Sheepe, and such like. Lastly, what fruits
the countrie yeeldeth: as Grapes, Wine, Oile, Apples,
Peares, Plummes, Orenges, Limons, Nuts, and such
like: and lastly, with what fuell the Land most aboundeth.
         Touching the second Mechanicall trade,Clothing. namely,
Clothing, a Trauailer must note what speciall stuffe
that Countrey yeeldeth for the same: whether of Lether,
Furres, beasts skins, haire, flaxe, wooll, barks of
trees, bombasie, silke, gold, siluer, or such like: and also
how the same is imployed, for garmēts or otherwise.
         
            
So the third,Masonrie. which is Masonry, requireth the knowledge
of such as are workers of stone, brick, or morter
& their artificiall compositions and symmetries. The
fourth,Carpentrie. which is Carpentrie is displayed in wood Caruers,
Ioyners, Carpenters, or builders of houses, shipwrights,
and in all other dependances. The fift, to wit,
Smitherie,Smitherie. is as variable as any of the former to bee
sought into: whether for varietie of metals to bee
wrought vpon, as Gold and Siluer-smithes, Coppersmiths,
Brasiers, Tinkers, Pewterers, Founders, blacke
and white smithes, & all such like: or for infinite kind
of tooles and Vtensils, for the necessaries of man, the
which are more excellent in some places than other,
euen by so much as the matter and the Arts-men
tend to perfection.Engining. The sixt and last is Engining, which
being an extract from the grounds of Mathematicall
knowledge, is also much the more to bee considered
well of Trauailers, in how much there may arise many
singular commodities to ones Countrey, both in
times of peace & warre. Wherin let Trauailers make
obseruatiō who be the most famous workers, & what
admirable things they worke & bring to passe, either
by conueyance of water by scrues, by pullies, by
weights, by causing vacuums or reinforcing of spirits
together in narrowe straights and Cylinders, and
by such other draughts of nature, kept secret from
the vulgar sort: the which in the warres are so necessary,
as in the citie for ciuill and necessarie vses. Insomuch
as if any man trauailing shal grow therby excellent,
he is worthy the name of honor & estimation,
though in other points he be found a weake obseruer.
This thing being of such singular proofe and vse

euerie where, may seeme to priuiledge Trauailers aboue
any one point of knowledge besides. About the
consideration of which although wee could not dwell
too long (for of it selfe it requireth a volume) yet other
manifould points vntouched doe craue our discourse
now.
         Only for discouerie let this be added, that whatsoeuer
by naturall conclusions and (as wee say) by sleight,
with small adoe effecteth great things (as to moue bodies
contrarie to nature violently, and swiftly; to make
powerfull any weake thing, and to discouer things vnto
the senses afar off out of their kēning, or to penetrate any
thing resistable) may be contained vnder the arte or science
of Engining. Hitherto concerning the commodities
of the Countrie:
         The Discommodities now may easily be ex opposito
collected from the former,6. Discommodities. to enlighten the sixt and last
point, concerning the Countrie. Notwithstanding,
we wil for better vnderstanding to some as it were make
repetition. The discommodities then of Countries are
either imperfectious, or wants. The imperfections naturall,
are either intemperatenesse and vnholesome aire
or extream barennesse of the Soile yeelding little or no
commodities, or aboundance of cruel beastes: of which
our Trauailer must haue a care, to vnderstand whether
the same be not for want of good husbandrie in the
people of the Countrie. The artificiall discommodities
are likewise two, Buildings, and trades. The defect
of the one hindereth a Countrie from well peopling, of
the other from well and orderly liuing. For it is a maxime
in policie, that no Countrie can be euer ciuile and
orderly where there be not good trades planted for setting

the Commons to worke, for the husbanding all
such commodities as their Countrie yeelds, and of
such as are brought vnto the same frō forrain parts: the
which to a Countrie much peopled is most needfull also.
Thus much concerning imperfections. The
wants are of those things properly, that other Countries
abound with: which necessarily ciuill Estates doe
want daiely, & must expect them from other places to
furnish them. For though there bee many Ilands
in the World, that content themselues and liue without
the commodities of other places; neither haue
they other then a certaine naturall kinde of prouision,
distributed well and orderly alike to all Nations for
the naturall support thereof: Yet being once brought
vnto ciuilitie, and to the taste of the World, either
to be equall with others, or to be engreatned; there is
no Natiō or Countrie, but standeth in necessarie neede
and want of forraine things: the which being once tasted
of generally, it is almost impossible to be left and
forgotten. The conclusion then of this point, for our
Trauailer may be, That he obserue what speciall thing
the Countrie standeth in neede of, the which is either
of clothing or of victuall: For, these two a Nation that is
ciuile and well ordered cannot long want. As concerning
clothing let it be sufficient which we haue touched
alreadie, in the Commodities: for out of the same may
be gathered the discommodities è conuerso. In like sort
may it be saide forvictuals: Only let a Trauailer make
obseruation what liuing Creatures hee shall finde that
cannot liue or bee found in the Countrie: As our Theodore
Zuingerus reporteth of Africk that neuer Hart
or wilde Boare was found there. And Plinie mentioneth

that in Arabia no Swine liueth. So in the Ilands
of Nea there are bred no Patridges, nor being thither
brought will liue. So some report of Ireland, that in it
liueth no venemous beast; for the Climate worketh all
vpon the people; a strange Constellation, for want of
of good Religion.
         Let these things suffice touching the 3 generall points
of knowledge respecting the Countrie.The fourth point of knowledge. The fourth
now offereth it selfe to our consideration: which is of
the Lawes and Customes that be vsed in the Countrey:Concerning Lawes.
the knowledge whereof may well reforme the weedy
affections of Trauailers, and redresse distemperatures
growen in their Countrie, and lastly, open the doore of
many policies, into which a Politician wil soone enter.
But first concerning the word Law, in the intendiment
there is a double respect to be had thereof. For,Lawes diuine and humane. all honest
lawes haue their deriuation and spring-head from
the eternall fountaine of reason of the will of God: in
which respect they in substance are all diuine. Notwithstanding
in regard of the diuersitie of people, as of
sundrie causes for which they haue beene reuealed and
promulgated, they are also humane and multiplex.
Wherefore, in the first respect, the Lawe is an opening
of the Diuine and eternall will, whereby GOD
teacheth and commaundeth what shall bee done and
left vndone, of men, ordained for his owne glorie,
chiefly then for the publike & priuate vse of men. Now,
since the reuelation of that diuine will of God hath
not beene manifested in one and the same manner alwaies
to all people, therefore in this respect the lawe
is distributed into three kinds properly: Into the Law
of GOD,The Law is triple. into the Law of NATVRE, and into the

Humane or Lawe of Men. Touching the law of God,
wee obserue the same either written or not written.1. The law of God. The
not written the learned call that which before the fall,
and afterwards,Note. was exercised till the Law by Moses was
deliuered to the people of Israell inscribed in Tables
of stone, and since of Christ himselfe, the Prophets, &
Apostles, enlarged, expounded, confirmed, & set forth:
the which was either Morall and perpetuall, or Iudicial
and politicall. But as concerning the written Law, cōmitted
wholly to the Israelites, lette it bee obserued
first that there were Lawes Morall contained vnder the
Decalogue or ten Commandements, perpetuall to all
people and Nations: though for a season the Gentiles
were gouerned by another consenting Law therewith,
namely, the Law of Nature. Secondly, that there
were Lawes Politicall and Iudiciall peculiar to the
Common-weale of Israell; and lastly Lawes Ceremoniall,
which being meerely politicall also were temporall
and to be abrogated by the perfecter, namely, by
Christ by whom all the Ceremoniall and infantiue
Lawes were disannuled and vtterly cancelled. Moreouer
it may not be forgotten, that vnder that vnwritten
Law of God is contained the Law of the spirit and of
life, which is peculiar to the Church of Christ, that
quickeneth the vnsanctified and weake Law of Nature
inscribed in the hearts of men, imprinting the will of
God in their hearts: whereby men by many degrees
steppe forwarde in the true knowledge of God & seruing
of him, at an instant as it were, through the efficacie
thereof, more then euer by the Law of nature they
are able to do. These things thus briefly exposed vnto
Trauailers, let it not seeme tedious to any to consider

well thereof. For without an exact knowledge of the
Law of God, there can be no sound iudgement of the
rest. And as our Sauiour Christ soundly reproued Nicodemus
the Pharisie, for that he was a iudge in Israel
and knewe not things of such excellencie and of so
great importance:Note. so might a Trauailer bee censured
for a shallow and ignorant person, that trauiling into
the lawes of Nations and peoples, is neuerthelesse to be
found ignorant in the Lawes of God, & of their deriuations,
which properly be the fountaines of all naturall
and humane lawes that be good & honest through
the world.
         But touching the Law of Nature,2. The Law of Nature. there is some
controuersie amongst the learned. For the Lawyers
define the Law of Nature to be that which teacheth
all Animall liuing things. But the Scholist Diuines
say the law of Nature, that to be, which is common
to all people, and that by instinct not by constitution,
restraining the same only to men. Wherefore, to
make the same more euident, by fauourable interpretation
of both, wee distribute the Lawe of Nature into
Common and Proper. The Common is that which
equally is common to other liuing Creatures aswell as
vnto men, that is to say, to defend themselues against
violēce, to preserue and maintain their liues and States,
to propagate, procreate, nourish & instruct their owne,
to eate, drinke, sleepe, rest, mooue and such like things,
euerie species according to his being and kinde. The
Proper is that lawe which is only peculiar vnto men, being
the will of God and diuine reason inscribed immediately
by God in the hearts of all men; wherby generally
they know what is good and euill, and consequently

what is to be followed and auoyded: the law
of conscience, by which the heathen and such as haue
not the law of God written shall be iudged. The effect
of which law is displaied in the knowledge of God and
in the worshippe of him; and also in the conseruation
of mutuall loue and societie betwixt mankinde:
From which not only the law of Nations hath a name
of substance, but the humane and positiue lawes their
descent and speciall deriuation, as from the spring of
right and reason.
         Moreouer, this law is not equally or so effectually
planted in the hearts of all men alike, but in some more
plentifully then in others, according to the secret and
wonderfull dispensation of the good pleasure of God
in the gouernement of the world: From whence there
ariseth such strange worshipping of God amongst the
Heathen, almost euerie Nation in a variable sorte.
Thus wee may see furthermore, that the law of Nature
and of Nations strictly and in the proper sense
taken may well bee confounded, for one and the
same, concerning actions: though after the common
sense they are distinguishable.Lawe of Nations. For, the law of Nations
is a certaine right and equall reason that naturally
bursteth out of men and Nations, for the necessarie
vse and conseruation of mankinde and for societie;
the which is also perpetuall, and arguing the conscience,
if it dissent from the same. From whence
the Lawes of Armes concerning prisoners taken in
the warres; the entertainement of messengers and
forraine Ambassadors, as all manner of contractes
twixt person and person, State and State, haue their
authoritie and reason, and doe in speciall manner

giue a name to the law of Nations, to the lawe of Nature:
which offereth to our Trauailer these three cōsiderations.
First,A consideratiō of moment. that in the Courts of Princes as otherwhere
hee obserue, what order and manner of
entertainement and respect is giuen to Ambassadors,
and Messengers of forraine States. Secondly, if such
an one chance to arriue in the warres of other Princes
and States, to note the carriage of one aduersarie to another
in matters of right, and of Prisoners and Captiues
especially as of Combattes, In a word to get their
discipline.
         Lastly, to note amongst heathen people, what
order in buying, and selling, exchanging, lending,
borrowing, mortgaging, pawning and keeping of societie.
For, happily from thence hee shall descrie
a more equall carriage and behauiour in them by the
law of Nature only guided, then many of our Ciuile
States do by all their meanes of knowledge in the laws
of God,Sed hoc non defectu legis, sed sensus. of Nature, and of men: the which we might
easily prooue. But to our Point now concerning the
Lawes Humane.
         Those are called the Lawes Humane, which frō the capacities
of men are conceited & by men are promulgated
and authorised: whether they depend vppon the
Law of God and of Nature,3. The law Humaine. or vpon their owne fancies:
Wherof, there are two rankes, Honest and Iust, or Tyrannicall
and vniust. The honest and iust do flow frō the
general springs and Maximes of the diuine and naturall
law ordained for the publike good of the Church and
Cōmō-weale; Wheras the Tyrānical & vniust, issue out
either of the vsurping breasts of vnlawfull authoritie
that haue no power to make lawes: or from such as

hauing power do after their own carnall mindes, make
ordinances for their owne proper commoditie and behoofe:
whereunto the traditions of men, yea and euery
superstitious ordinance and euill custome may be referred.
Wherefore whensoeuer a Trauailer shall looke
into the body of the lawes of any Countrie or people,
let his iudgement be neither partiall nor weake,Note. but
grounded vpon the sound rules and eternall reason of
the diuine and Naturall Law. Moreouer by the word
Lawes humane, is meant in this place the written
positiue and politicall Lawes: For in substance they
are all one and conuertible, yea and for the profitte
of each Nation commutable, so as they neuer contrarie
the lawes diuine or naturall. By reason whereof
we finde that some honest lawes in qualitie differ, either
in punishing, or rewarding, or in inciting to that
which is good, or restraining from that which is euill:
the which is meerely a politicall promulgation consonant
to some States for a season, and verie needefull in
speciall cases.
         Neuerthelesse there bee many verie pertinax
in this opinion, that Though a State shall inflict
for good causes a greater punishment on malefactors
for such and such crimes, then the lawes of God or of
Nature doo, yet they are ignorāt by what warrāt of like
policie, any State may abbridge the rigor of the law of
God in capitall offenses. For such lawes say they are
both iudiciall and eternal, by which policie no doubt
States may bee best gouerned: for proofe whereof the
abbridgers (say they) of such laws are, by the heathē people
that haue not the written law of God, conuinced &
taught how to rule in like cases.
         
            
Of humane and positiue lawes there is a variable
consideration,Lawes positiue variable. according to the vse and titles that euery
Countrie and State holdeth peculiarly almost. As generally
heere in England wee tearme our law by the
name of Common law, it being a peculiar law to this
State and members. So the Romans in times past called
their law the Ciuile law. Though indeed all good
lawes (as Iustinian himselfe confesseth) may wel enough
be tearmed Ciuile lawes; yet for distinction sake,
let it bee taken heere whensoeuer wee shal name Ciuile
lawes, for those that were refined by the Emperor
Iustinian, and set foorth by him: the which at this day
are vsed in most of the ciuile States and Nations of Europe,
either in part or altogether. From whence let Trauailers
make this obseruation, Whether the lawes of
the Countrie wherein they trauaile, be lawes prerogatiue
or positiue. For there are some Countries gouerned
by lawes meerely prerogatiue:Lawes prerogatiue. of which wee
will first expound, to such as intende for to trauaile.
         These kinde of Lawes be for the most part vnwritten;
and therefore require the more care to be searched
out and into, for their vncertaintie. Moreouer, let Trauailers
obserue how farre the prerogatiue of Princes
and States doth stretch ouer their Subiects. For, there
are some so absolute and sole tyrannous, that all things
are gouerned according to the will of the Prince: and
euerie commoditie of the Countrie stands at the Princes
pleasure. Such is the Tartarian and great Cam. Others
there are halfe tyrannous, whose displeasure
and will hath no law to curbe the vnrulinesse thereof:
such is the Turke, the Muscouian, and the Pope.
         
            
Others there are, according as they are, religious and
fearers of the true God, and Princes of ciuile and religious
States, whose prerogatiue is much, but yet in ciuile
and honest actions: being free themselues from punishment
of their lawes in some sorte; and may from
time to time dispense with and chaunge their lawes,
constituting new as is expedient for the good of the
Common-weale.
         Neuerthelesse, some there are that haue, of these also,
greater prerogatiue then others, according to their gouernment
and state of policie. For better discouerie, the
law prerogatiue is to be searched either in the person of
the Prince,How to discern lawes prerogatiue▪ or in the Magistracie which hath his power
from the Prince on State. The Prince (or State if it bee
an Aristocracie) hath absolute power, & not controulable,
to command anything, action, or person, whatsoeuer
carrieth semblance of good to the State, or that
cōtrarieth not the law of God & of Nature. Moreouer,
to forbid & controule anything, persō, or actiō whatsoeuer
of like nature, whether by word of mouth, whether
by letters, proclamatiōs, edictes or such like means
as Princes or States vse. And lastly by cōmission to authorize
other to reward and punish, according to the
offence done, euerie fault that is not encountred by the
Law positiue alreadie; perseruing the life, members,
and speciall liuelyhood of the delinquents.
         The prerogatiue of the Magistracie may be discerned
as in our Countrie, in the high Court of Parliament,
in the authoritie of the Councell, in that of
the Starre Chamber, in the Lord Chancellor, Lorde
Treasurer, Lord high Counstable, Lord Mareschall,
Lord Admirall▪ in the principal Secretarie, in the chiefe

Iustices and iudges of the Land, in each Maior and
Towne Corporate, and lastly in euerie high Commissioner
and speciall Officer that the Prince of this Land
deputeth to vndergoe any charge at home or abroad.
So is it in all other States and Countries. The which
being cōsidered by Trauailers, they shal be able to discerne
the authoritie royall of the Prince and State, as
well in Politicall as in Ecclesiasticall giuing & making
of Lawes. Touching the lawes Positiue, they bee either
Political or Ecclesiastical.Lawes positiue Politicall. The Political are either ancient
& Maximes of perpetuall obseruāce, or Modern &
mutable. The ancient are such as the Romanes called
the Ciuile lawes in speciall; such as the French their
law Salique, & such as we the Common law. The Moderne
are all those lawes which goe vnder the name of
Statutes, Decrees, Ordinances, Edicts and such like, being
in all Ciuile States put into print: the which are by
so much the easier to bee attained vnto by Trauailers,
wherin they may at leasure discouer euerie thing as in a
glasse, either cōcerning the nature of the people, or the
State of the Countrie, The Politicall lawes are changeable,
according to the standing of things; that the
State may grow to perfection. The Ecclesiasticall
are tradicions lawfull or vnlawfull.Ecclesiasticall, The vnlawfull
bee such as are contrarie to the lawe of God, and tha
in no sort tend vnto edification: of which crue
a Trauailer shall meete, within most States. But let him
bee carefull to collect the best wheresoeuer: the
which hee shall discerne by their coates; namely▪ if
they crosse not Gods word or destroy not more then
they edifie. The lawfull tradicions be rules or Canons
of doctrine, of manners, of rites and Ceremonies

pertaining to godlines, that consent with the holy word
of God and tend to edification. Touching the rules of
doctrin, the Apostles inspired with the holy Ghost haue
left many: the generall and prouinciall Synodes of
godly and honest minded men haue set foorth others,
the which are for the vnderstanding of the holy Scriptures
verie profitable. And lastly, euerie lawfull State
and Church hath absolute power, without the consent
of the Pope or any other forraine approbation, to doe
the like; gathering euermore their constitutions & rules
form the word of God. Touching those of manners
and of Ceremonies, euerie lawfull State and Church
hath absolute power to decree that which shall be most
agreeable with the nature of the State: yet so as all those
Constitutions tend to edification, and bee so neerely
drawen from the holy Scriptures and the best discipline
of other Churches, as neere may be. These bee the
exacte rules for to make discouerie; wherby three commodities
shall redound to Trauailers. First, they shall
be able to iudge whether the Countries leane by their
lawes to this or that religion: Secondly, whether the
people be nourished in the right or wrong: and lastly,
they may gather thereby the most sincere and vpright
orders for the perfecting of their owne Countrie and
informing themselues. For when such are well seene
into the lawes of other Countries and expert in those
of their owne Nation, they haue well purchased a goodly
Mannor and trench of Land to build policies vpon.
Moreouer, it is verie expedient for Trauailers to marke
not only how many distinct kinds of Lawes the Countrie
vseth to gouerne their people by; but in speciall,
what are gell, what particular lawes pertaining to

seuerall diuisions of the Countrey, as those of shires
and Seigniories of townes, places and persons, &c.
And lastly, if, in regard of the time of trauailing, such
be able to take degrees for the approbation of their
knowledge in the Vniuersities, no doubt the honour
and the commodity wil be very great. For, the title of
a degree so atchieued, wil celebrate more their worth
than any other meanes, by getting credite to their
learning and iudgement, and making them capable
of preferment, hauing authoritie to be imployed in
the seruice of the Common-weale. Thus much concerning
the lawes: the which a Trauailer may referre
vnto three heads, if he please; To Things, to Persons,
to Actions. The Customes now follow.
         Customes, they are certaine vses of the Prince, State,Customes.
or people of the countrie, vnwrittē for the most part,
that doe prescribe, or stand in force as lawes, chiefly
if they bee good and profitable for the Commonweale;
whereof there are three nkes, that Trauailers
must consider them in: Generall, Particular,Generall Particular, Regal. and Regall.
By the Generall Customes are meant the ancient vse
and ordering of all things according to the ancient
nature thereof. Of which let Trauailers first
note their alterations. These may be discerned in the
giuing of Lawes: in ensample whereof, wee haue, at
this day, a more exact and ful order of the three states,
concerning forme, than in former times. Secondly,
in the Princes priuate State and houshold: Lastly, in
Religion, in diet, in apparell, and in the externall order
of things and persons. In all which Customes,
most Common-weales differ. Whereof we will ensample
onely, to our Trauailer, the Princes priuate

estate and houshold which we cal the Court. Wherein
what ordinary attendants and dependants, and
what ceremonies, orders, and customes are appertaining
to the person of the Prince, or to the place it selfe
wheresoeuer the Court shalbe, or to the Nobility, are
the rather to be learned of Trauailers, that they may
not be ignorāt of the proper cariage of euery Court,
to enforme themselues of behauiour. In Tartarie this
custome is vsed, that no stranger of what quality or
degree soeuer, dare put himselfe in the Kings presence,
to negotiate with him, before hee hath beene
purged with their fire. Neither is it permitted to any
stranger, to set his foote on the threshold of the
Cams lodging, or where any of his Princes or Lieutenants
dwell, on paine of death. And in our ciuill
States we see, no forreiner dare present himselfe to
the presence of the Prince, but by permission, or in
speciall cases, and at special times. Hence moreouer
ariseth our great respect to our Princes, in honouring
and saluting them; whereas the French are little
vncouered, and nothing so respectiue. Some countrey
people do kneele in the presence of their Prince,
others gaze in their faces onely: others cast downe
their heads and lookes; and some (as the inhabitants
of Baccalaos, or of the new Land fish) haue a custome
when they reuerence their King, in his presence to
rub their noses, and stroking their forehead with their
hand vnto the necke; the which the King accepteth
as an honest and due office and seruice, turning his
head eftsoones, to his left shoulder, which is a note of
singular fauour, and gratefulnesse of the King to honour
his Subiect. The which customes, or the like,

though they be strange and not regular, yet doe
they become well enough the bounds of euery nation.
In like sort, the customary phrase of writing and
speaking, of action, of body, of reuerencing, and such
such like, are so to be pondered of Trauailers that they
introduce not them into their owne Country, vnlesse
those customes be of a more ciuill carriage, then such
as their Countrey vseth. For, that is a fowle and irregular
tricke of common Trauailers, to innouate
new fangles of fashions in their Countrey, when they
returne, though they iudge thē to be of better esteem.
This is a common staine, and delight of Ilands. But as
it is a shame for ciuill States to be variable in the custome
of diuersitie of fashions, wondring at the
customes of other lesse ciuill graces and behauiours,
so as needes those must bee put in practise by them;
so a Trauailer that innouateth forreine peculiar customs
of other Courts in his Countrey, where either
more ciuill, or as good are vsed, swarueth from the
guise of completenesse in Trauailers requirable.
         The Particular Customes concerne the members
of the State,Particular Customs. as Countreys, Dukedomes, Principalities,
Counties, Seigniories, Domaines, Cities, Towns,
Corporations, Castles, Cittadels, Fortes, and such
like: which require also in regard of their excellencie
to bee looked into, so farre foorth as by discourse
and discreete wayes may bee of Trauailers
followed after. The third and last Customes are
Regall, which properly are the maiesticke prerogatiue
of the Countrey,Regall of the Prince, and Nobilitie, aswell
within their precinct as in and vnder the iurisdiction
of another power. Whereof first let it

bee regarded, what preeminence the Countrey
claimes to haue, in and ouer other Countreys not tributary
or subiect to the same. Secondly, as concerning
the Prince, let it be noted what titles, of Custome,
he is inuested with: as the French King to be the most
Christian King, which in those dayes was well arrogated
from other nations: As the King of Spaine to
bee called, the most Catholike King; which title in
those dayes was proper to him (I speake as a Romist)
for he was Maximus bellator & professor Romanae Catholicae
ecclesiae: And as our Souereigne King of Great
Britaine, by like custome now, and with better title,
may most rightfully challenge to be the greatest and
sincerest Defender of the faith of Christ thorow the
world; euen so was it a title in those dayes when it
was reassumed and acknowledged of his Ancestor of
proper attribution (though the Pope had another slie
and slouenly meaning and fetch of policie,Quia scripsit contra Lutherū. in the bequest).
For, within a little after, that most vndanted
King Henry the eight (whom for perpetuall honor
sake I thought good to name) by the good pleasure of
God, became the onely stout Defender of the faith of
Christ singularly, in shaking off the Popes supremacie,
and withstanding his displeasure. Whereunto also
let a Trauailer learne, what place, of Custome, the
Prince hath amongst other Princes: and how farre
the souereigntie of Princes stretcheth, and of States.
The which souereignty is discernable in foure points:
The first is to haue power absolute to giue lawes to al
in generall and in particular, without controlment; as
Priuiledges, Liberties, Franchisedomes,The foure markes of Souereigntie. Honors, and
such like regalities to places or persons. The second

note of Souereigntie is to decree warre or peace, or
to enter into treaties concerning them. The third is
to institute and ordaine principal officers. The fourth
is to haue the last Appeale, which is one of the true
markes of Souereigntie, vnder which dependeth the
power to grant pardon to the condemned by course
of law in fauour to redresse the rigor of the lawe, and
formall proceedings of Magistrates, whether concerning
life, goods, honor, banishment or libertie. In
all which, Trauailers shal find in most States great defect;
in fewe, all absolutely. For concerning the first,
what honourable Prince (not naming the Pope, the
Turke, the Tartarian, and such like tyrants) of himself,
without associates, decreeth lawes? And not without
good cause: for it noteth iustice, and desire to gouerne
aright, knitting the Subiects to their Prince.
Neuerthelesse, we see that in former times the Princes
of this Land, and of France, as of òther States, did constitute
of themselues many good lawes in force at
this day. So touching the second, there be some States
that by custome and willingnes to complease their
subiects, will seldome make warre, or entertain peace,
without priuate consent of their Councell, or general
debating of the Parliament. Likewise of the third
there is amongst States and gouernements, a great diuersitie,
in the instituting and ratifying of principall
officers: which custome hath been brought from the
Prince or State no doubt, for the shew of the Common-weales
good; so the same be not transported to
forraine States, as the Pope arrogateth in Ecclesiasticall
promotions. And touching the last point we see
also how great Princes are stripped of their Souereignty,

reigntie, by the Pope in matters of appeale, of giuing
pardons and such like regalities to subiects, and great
offenders against their Prince and countrey. Thus in
these let Trauailers euerie where make obseruation
how of custome either the States doe hold their
Souereigntie, or howe by like Custome they haue
abbridged or lost their marks of absolutenesse. Lastly,
let it be considered of the customes and prerogatiues
of the Nobilitie of a nation; the chiefe whereof
resteth in their superioritie and preheminence in
sitting,Customes of the Nobilitie, going, talking, eating, washing, subscribing,
arrogating peculiar phrases, and order of stile in writing,
and such like. All which are to be considered
by times, places, and persons, that thus and by a customarie
dutie and respect honour each other. Wherein
if Trauailers wilbe verie iudiciall, they had neede to
be good heralds and studious in the customarie lawe
and discipline of Armes of that nation. Hitherto concerning
the lawes and customes of a nation, so briefly
as we could, to the vnexpert in the affaires of the
countrey. The fift point of knowledge now offereth
it selfe, which is concerning the gouernment of the
countrey.
         5 The Gouernment hath a twofold managing therof:The fift point of knowledge▪ Concerning the gouermēt.
the one exterior and discernable, the other interior,
secret and priuate onely, in a wise State, to the
Counsel thereof, or onely lodged in the breast of the
Prince, which to a wise Prince is a high pointe of
politicke gouernment. Of this interior we will giue
Trauailers a secret taste in the last part, namely, in
the Secrets. For, the obiect of a Trauailer is properly
the publike and reuealed gouernment. In this Gouernment

three things concurre. First,Three things remarkeable in the gouernmēt the persons
gouerning; secondly, the people gouerned; lastly,
the common and speciall policie, or instruments, that
subsist for the establishing of a cōmon good towards
all men; by the vertue wherof, life, health, peace, prosperitie
and happinesse without interruption is conueyed
vnto the bodie politick: Wheras the defect and
vicious ordering of things, soon corrodeth, or putteth
the same into a consumptiō irreuocable.1. The persons gouerning. Concerning
the persons gouerning, we obiect to Trauailers a triple
consideration according to the three-fold diuersitie
of Cōmon-weales. For, by the persons gouerning
we meane also those simple variable three formes of
gouernment,Three formes of gouerment. namely, the Monarchial: which is when
the Soueraignty and supreme authority, without controlment,
resteth in one person or Prince, as in our
King of Great Britaine. The Aristocraticall is when as
the lesser part of the people, or of the Nobilitie haue
the Souereigntie in body, giuing lawes to the rest of
people in generall and particular, as the Seigniorie
of Venice, and the State of the vnited Prouinces in
the Lowe Countreys. And the Democraticall or
popular Estate: which is when as the whole people,
or greater part thereof in bodie, hath the Souereigne
authoritie. Which had neede to bee well considered
of Trauailers, by so much the more as they see
great learned men confounded or deceiued in the
iudgements of them. For, neither the qualities of
persons can change the nature or number of
them; nor can there bee any mixt State of forme
and continuance, but either by Graunt, Permission,
Communication, Association, or Assignation

of the Souereigne power, to the members subiect.
But lest Trauailers might be misseled by the opinions
of others, let them obserue diligently, in what persons
and in which of these, those foure markes of Souereigntie
(before spoken of in the Customes of the
Countrey) doe reigne; which here for breuitie I omit,
especially the ordering of officers, the decreeing
of peace and warre, and taking of Appeales. But for
the publishing of lawes, the most ciuill States for the
better securitie of them, and content of the people
are euer assisted in Monarchies with the three Estates.
And in some States also for the better dispatch of
things, many of the other three markes are committed,
but yet restrictiuely, and vnder controulement.
Wherefore let Trauailers consider now these things
aright, and proue the censures of other men, by those
markes of Souereigntie which inuest the formes
with supreme power. Moreouer, in the second place
let Trauailers note, what principall officers are in the
commitment ordained to helpe the motion and gouernment
of the helme of the State. And lastly, how
farre their seuerall offices doe extend. For the better
insight into which, there may bee gathered a triple
consideration of officers, namely; first, such as stand
by ancient right and Custome, as those which we cal
Officers at the Common Lawe: Secondly, such as
haue their authoritie by Commission, and that from
the prerogatiues of the Prince or State Souereigne:
Lastly, such as are ordained by the positiue lawes of
the land to vndergo any businesse for the good of the
Common-weale. Finally, let Trauailers be carefull to
obserue the maner and order of making & publishing

of lawes there vsed; the course of entertaining warres;
the ordinarie policie vsed in time of peace, concerning
preparation for warres defensiue and offensiue; the common
course of proceeding in iustice and iudgement,
the places, and times, and ministers; the fashion of punishing
& rewarding of all sorts of people acording to
their deserts, and such like appurtenances & appendices
of the gouernment. Let these suffice for the persons
gouerning.
         The People gouerned, wee cast into sixe moulds,2. The gouerned.
namely into that of Husbandmen, of Handicrafts men,
and Labourers; of Marchants, of the Nobilitie and
Gentrie, of stipendarie Souldiers, and of Ecclesiasticall
persons. As touching the three first of these, the
lawes of most States will discouer howe they bee gouerned.
But as concerning the Nobilitie and Ecclesiasticall
persons, they assume in most States much libertie:
Of whome let it be sufficient for our Trauailer
to note, how they liue and what they are enclined
vnto.
         And as concerning Stipendarie Souldiers (if the
State afford any) let it be considered, how they are
disciplined, and by whom, their number, their priuiledges,
and lastly their entertainment.
         Now,3. The policie or Instruments the last point to be considered in the gouernment
concerneth the common and speciall policie or
instruments, whereby the gouernors conuey nourishment
vnto the gouerned to vphold the cōmon health
of the State,The meanes how to discern the policie. or to plucke the same vpon the knees.
These speciall policies or instruments may be surueyed
of Trauailers in three things.
         First, in the goodnesse or illnesse of the Coūtries laws,

and customes. Secondly, in the accidents that moue
the soueraigne Power, for the presēt standing of things,
to cōstitute and decree timely, and broche such policies
as may encounter cure and remoue any disease, surfaite
or distemperature growen, or growing in the bodie
politick, till by a law those inconueniences may be preuented.
The contrarie will chaunce where such defect
reigneth. Lastly, in the due execution of such lawes as
are enacted and in force: the which vnite or disioyne
the bodie, most firmely, or in piecemeales; so as there
cannot but arise from the one a sweet and tuneable harmonie
of gouernment, and from the other all iarres
and discordes: the which shall minister to Trauailers
plentie of matter to plot policies vpon. Thus much of
the policies.
         The sixt and last point of knowledge now remaineth:The sixt point of knowledge, concerning the secrets.
which is of the Secretes of the State where men trauaile;
The singular point that ennobleth a Trauailer
aboue the home-politician & the foundatiōs of momentall
policies.
         The Secrets are those things which are neither noted
nor learned of the vulgar sort of people: they are notwithstanding
common and accidentall, the which doe
oft change one into another. The Common SecretesThe Common secrets of two sorts. rest
in two points in the intelligence of such as are forreine
friends, newters or enimies to the Countrie wherin one
trauaileth: And in the knowledge of the ordinarie
strength of the State of the Countrie in which men trauaile.
The first of these considereth friends,1. Forraine. newters, and
enimies: Out of which though there be seuerall secrets
to be extracted, yet we will for breuitie giue our Trauailer
a release of them in the discouerie of friends; since

the rest may either è diuerso or conuer so be displaied.A consideratiō of friends to an estate. Of
friends therefore in this kind, namely political, there is a
triple regard. First, by bloud and neerenesse of kinne:
Secondly, by religion and profession of one and the
same faith; Lastly, by meere politicall coniunction of
friendship, confedracie, alliance and league, to settle &
secure &c. each others State in peace, & safetie. Now,
since all these friends in matters of State are euer neerest
to themselues, running the straightest course for the
good of their owne estates, few can be found so honest
& firme as their friendships are neuer disioynable. Howbeit
we might see a rare example twixt France and Scotland,
in times past. And thoughe Religion bee the
streightest conioyner of States: yet when Ambition
or couetousnesse or selfe-loue inuade a body politicke,
sildome the friendshippe of such continue longer then
they will aide and cherish those greedie appetites; Enuy
and feare of ouermuch greatnesse making the one an
hypocrite to hunt with the hounde, and runne with the
hare, according to the prouerbe. From the politicall
cōiunction of friendship,Two sorts of friends politicall. we gather two sorts of friends
to euerie State: namely the pleasurable, who for commodities
& marchandise are chiefly retained for friends,
to enrich their States in times of peace & accommodate
them with things needefull mutually. Hence we behold
the lawfulnesse of Christian States to traffick with Pagans
and Infidels.
         For, contractes of peace and entercourse of commodities
may be betweene any Nations, since the partition
wall is broken down; it being a rule of charity for
one State now to entertain & relieue another, with such
commodities as the one either standeth in neede of, or

excelleth the other in. Neuerthelesse, in leagues, alliances
and confederacies, for war, it standeth otherwise
twixt Christian and Pagan Princes. That other sort of
friends are the profitable, who for the politicall defence
and offence are collegued and allianced or cōfederated
with, either to be relieued for iniurie and wrong receiued,
or to be defended against oppression and violence,
or in policie only for feare of sensiblenesse and feare of
the worst. Moreouer, it is not sufficient for a Trauailer
to note thus, who be pleasurable & profitable friends to
that Countrie wherein he trauaileth, but to weighe also
by all meanes the power and strength or weakenesse
of those friends,The strength of friends, Newters or enimies, to that Countrie.
The which may be discouered to our Trauailer in foure
points. As first in the populousnesse of them, or defect
of people, and in the well disciplining of them; or
sufferance to liue ad libitum, and without any Martiall
gouernment. For, from hence ariseth one maine secreat
to our Trauailer, That those Coūtries so strengthened
may be presumed vpon for great friends: and contrariwise.
So the second resteth in the neere neighbourhood
or fitnesse of such friends to impeach an enimie.
         The third may bee noted in the commodities of
those friends to aide and succour that State in cases of
necessitie, with victuall, munition, Armes, horses, shipping
and money; which are the arteries, veines, sinews
and muscles of bodies politicke, in forreine troubles.
Of which this secret riseth; That such friendes so
well furnished must euermore bee well and euenly
dealt with: considering they are daungerous enemies
or neuters; the rather in regard, before a State
can be sensible of their enimitie, they can suddainly

offend. Neuerthelesse, let Trauailers in this point
consider what care those States take, to reteine from
trafficke, munition offensiue: For it is a weaknesse
and danger to tolerate the trafficke of munition offensiue,
to friend or neurer, the which in time
may beard ones selfe, and speake terrour in the
eares of the first owners. The fourth and last concerning
the strength of friendes remaineth: that
Trauailers prie into the reuolution of those States
in three things: as, in the Religion of those States; in
their Warlikenesse; and in their Freedome.Religious friends. Of these
briefly. And first let vs treate of their religion; whether
those friends hold the same religiō that the State
whereof they are friends doth, or whether of a contrarie
profession; the one yeelding euer a more steady
loue, than the other. And in case of contrary religion,
such friends are soone lost, and soone presse a people
to be mortall enemies. From whence flowe infinite
secrets of this kinde, familiar to good States-men.
         Touching the warlikenesse of friends, that may be
considered either in their good discipline at home,Warlike frends, or
the employment of their people abroad in forraine
warres. Out of which let a Trauailer note this secret,
that such are strong friends and to bee put in trust:
whereas those States that bee so exceedingly desirous
of peace, that they neglect the ordinary discipline
of warre, are either weake and impotent friends,
or vnsteady and wauering. Moreouer, from whence
an other maine secret ariseth: that populous and rich
States, which chuse rather to yeeld to seruitude, by
paying tribute, taxes and other intolerable burdens,
then to defend their liberties (vnlesse in special cases)

are neither trustie friends, nor great enimies, to bee
feared. For, that State which preferreth not his
owne libertie, cannot be sensible of anothers, in such
sort as is requireable.
         Lastly, concerning the freedome of friends, there is
a diuers standing: namely,Freedome of friends. from miserie, and from subiection.
Of freedom from misery we see most States
of Europe at this day, vnlesse where vsurpers or tyrants
rule, and dominiere. Of freedom from subiection
there is a proper & improper constitutiō. Those
States are properly free, whose policie hangeth not
vpon any forrain power, acknowledging no other superiour
than God, either in Temporal or Ecclesiasticall
matters; nor that are tributary, or homagial to any
forreine State. Such at this day is England, Moscouy,
Turkie, Persia, & Tartaria, and that of Prester Iean, who
of the rest vanteth, that his Nation was neuer conquered;
or acknowledged any other forreine Prince.
Those that improperly are free, are such States as either
acknowledge other superiour, or equall Lord or
Lords, in Ecclesiasticall or Temporall matters, than
God, & their politicall Lord or Lords, or are tributary
or homagiall in any respect to forreine powers. Such
in the first sense at this day are France, Spaine, the Empire,
Italy, Denmarke, and all those States that hold of
the Pope or Emperour. So, such of the second clause
are those States thorow the world, that pay and yeeld
a certain taxe, homage, or tribute, for acknowledging
and respecting their subiection. Hence it may bee inferred,
that those friends can doe a State little profit,
that are in distresse themselues, as ingaged with intestine,
& ciuil distemperatures; or afflicted by an equal

or greater enemie, as iealous of some great and imminent
danger themselues: or that be not well disciplined,
or not at libertie to dispose of themselues without
those States to whom they are subiect: or in case
any of their possessions bee in question, as belonging
to an other equall or greater Power. All which, in a
word, may Trauailers cōfirme to themselues, in those
States ouer which the Pope hath any stroke; who
arrogating a power to disioyne the members from
the head, and to set the Subiects against their Prince,
can also make debate twixt Prince and Prince, State
and State. Thus much of the first poynt of forreine
friends, &c. to the Countrey, into which men trauaile.
         Now touching the second,2. The State at home discernable in foure points. which we named, to
consist in the knowledge of the ordinarie strength of
the State of the Country in which men trauaile,1, Sufficiencie of people. there
are 4 things cōsiderable; the Sufficiēcie of the people;
Store of commodities,2, Store of cōmodities. not only to nourish the people
within the land, but to make & procure friendship in
speciall cases; plenty of Munition, either offensiue or
defensiue; and the fulnesse of Treasure,3, Munition plenty. Reuenue, and
Domaine.4, The Treasurie, Of these foure we haue handled the three
former thorowout our Treatise, sufficiently for a Trauailer.
But the fourth, that is to say, the Domaine or
Treasure, wee had neede to touch a little. First, let it
be considered therefore, that in Monarchies there is a
priuate and a publike reuenue and treasure: the publikePriuate and publicke.
being dispended for the good of the Common-weale;
whereas the priuate patrimonie of Princes are
dispendable on their necessities priuate: yet these
are oft confounded. But the first that chaunceth to

the consideratiō of Trauailers, is to note what summe
those ioyntly or seuerally doe amount vnto. Whereby
they shall be able to discerne the riches and pouertie
of States, computatis computandis. This maine secret
brocheth three considerations; First, how and
on what the summe is gathered: secondly, how that is
disposed: thirdly whether there be not alwayes a reseruation
of treasure, for the suddaine and needfull vse
of those States.
         Touching the first of these,Seuen meanes whereby treasures are gathered. 1. Reuenue. we obserue from politicians
seuen wayes that amasse publike treasure and
reuenew, honourably. First, by reuenue which wee
tearm here in Englād the profits of the Crown-lands,
of Wards, Mariages, of Reliefs, of Eschetes, of Fines,
of Forfeitures, of Amercemēts, of Iurisdictions ordinary
as extraordinarie,2. Conquest. and such like. Secondly, by
conquest vpō the enemie. Thirdly,3. Gifts. by gifts of friends
and wel wishers to the State and Crowne.4. Tribute. Fourthly
by pension and tribute of subiected States and Allies.
Fiftly,5. Trafficke. by trafficke: the which to some States is
very gainefull. Sixtly,6. Merchandise by Merchandise and trade of
strangers or subiects, frō whence ariseth the Impostes
& Customs vpon euery commoditie brought in or
caried out of States.7. Taxations. Lastly, in case of necessity the seuēth
may be added: wherof in some driuē States there
is ordinarie and extraordinarie (as for casuall they be
included in the former).Ordinarie and extraordinary. The ordinarie are such as we
call Subsides, Lones, Tenths, Fifteenths, stipends,
and asseasments for Souldiers prest. The extraordinarie,
are taxes, tallages, gabels, and beneuolences,
either imposed vpon particulars, or in speciall cases
vpon the most in generall. Out of all which let Trauailers

note, what and how much of either and in what
order the same are rated, leauied and assembled into the
treasurie. From whence they may collect this and
such like secrets, That vnlawfull and great impositions
and taxes in a free State do oft cause a heart-burning of
the Commons, and openeth the passage of sedition,
vnlesse in especiall cases, in which there ought
to bee a publike ouerture for the same as for the expense.
         Moreouer, that may not be ouerslipped, Whether the
the Princes or States where men trauaile, are enforced
vppon important accidentes to take vp money
by imprestes and borrowinges, or by mortgages or
at interest. For, as amongst priuate persons, so
in publike States more sodainely there groweth a great
defect, and bankeruptnesse, which is subiect to daungers.
         Now, as touching the maine secret of employing
the treasure and reuenewe of the State in the second
place wee finde sixe honorable causes to dispend the
same (out of which a Trauailer may cull seuerall secrets:
as the good and orderly gouernement,6, Causes to exhaust treasures. or contrariwise,
of the Prince or State, his or their vertues or vices
&c.) namely Almeshouses and publike reliefe and
prouision for the poore of the Realme;1. Almeshouses. whereby is discouered
a religious and charitable care of such as stand
in neede.
         Secondly,2. Housekeeping. vpon the honorable and necessarie
support of the house-hold and publike Court of the
Prince or State: which, being well husbanded, argueth
maiestie, bountie and wisedome.
         
            
Thirdly,3. Reparations and buildings needfull. vpon reparations and edifications of fortifications
and buildings; of building ships and shipping,
and such like publike matters of the State, which deserueth
a publike and peculiar regard of subiects & State,
and taketh away the hatred of taxes and impositions
by rendering the same back againe to the hands of particulars
and States good, wherby profit, honour and
securitie ariseth.
         Fourthly,4. Due payments. vpon the due payment of Souldiers and
men of Martiall affaires; the which argueth discretion
and high care to encounter infinite occasions of euills,
both growing in the Commanders as common souldiers,
whereof a prying care must be had.
         Fiftly,5. Gifts to strāgers and offisers. vppon strangers, as Embassadors and such
of forraine Nobilitie as are therby retained in loue and
office to bee tenderers of the honour and weale of
those States, of visiting Princes, and also vpon Officers
and men of good deserte within the State. Lastly,6. Donatiues politicke. vpon
the policie of the State it self, for retaining of friends or
procuring thē by donatiues politicke, & lendinges: out
of which arise many secreates, according to the seuerall
motions or actions of a Prince or State in vertuous or
vitious dispending the same.
         The last point of this common secreat, is to note
what ordinarie and extraordinarie treasure is euermore
reserued in the State. And as it is a daungerous thing
in times of warre and troubles to vndertake businesse
vppon borrowings or vsurie, vnlesse in speciall cases;
so also it is perilous to assemble a greater treasure, then
is meete: for that causeth subiectes oft to murmur if
the same come from them, or inuiteth other States

to picke quarrelles to be nibbling therewith. Lastly,
whether there be such niggardlinesse of the Prince seeking
to spare treasure, as hee diminish much the dignitie
of his household and also the Maiestie of his person.
         Whereof wee read, that King Lewis the Eleuenth
of France (whome Philip de Comines so much extolleth)
so farre diminished his houshold as hee forbad
his Nobles to followe him in Court (at the least at
their owne charges) as that hee was faine to employ
his Taylor for his Heralde at Armes, his Barbar for
an Ambassadour, and his Physician for Chauncellor.
And for his person, hee was so respectlesse, as hee
continually ware an olde course cloth Cappe, and
leauing a recorde for buying a paire of meane sleeues
to an olde plaine doublet of his. And also in his accomptes
was obserued to pay xv. pence for so much
dripping to grease his bootes. Thus much concerning
the common Secreats. Quaere tamen si sit frugalitatis
causa, & propter Reip. bonum.
         The Accidentall follow; which are such as chance
daiely in or without a State,Secrets Accidentall, and that so diuersely as
that we can but giue an assaie or taste of thē to Trauailers
in this treatise. For, euerie action of the State
wherin one trauaileth, or of other forraine States vnfould
secreates and are meete materialles to diuine of
future things▪ which now in the interim is to be required
of Trauailers.Where those secrets may be discerned. Those accidentall secrets are to bee
sought in three thinges: namely, in the persons
gouerning; in the persons gouerned: and in the instrumēts.
From the persons gouerning I obserue these
points; First,1. Negotiatiōs and Contracts. what be the negotiations and contractes

the State or Prince offereth and maketh with other
States frō time to time: the which although they seeme
hard to come by, yet discreet carriage and liberalitie
will purchase them. Secondly,2. Sucessin by election and by inheritance. what order euerie principalitie
hath in the succession of their gouernour, whether
by election or by inheritance. The first ordaining
of a Prince by election was good, to auoyde all
such wants and imperfections, as raigne ordinarily in
Princes hereditarie: yet such corruption inuadeth this
age, that sildome soueraigne Princes will constitute
their vicegerent, or elect Prince of an other State, a man
popular, or that is wiser then themselues. And sildome
wil subiects, that are few in number to make election,
elect men of more spirit, wisedome & worthinesse then
thēselues, vnlesse in special cases: wherof the Colledge
of the Cardinalls and the Electors of the Emperor find
ease and profitte. Those Countries that are by succession
of inheritance, are likewise of two sorts, generall
and speciall. Moreouer, vnder this maine secret, dependeth
the insight into the Lawes concerning the disposing
of the Crowne; and the Wils, testaments and deuises
that are made by Princes, to bequeath the same, so
farre forth as they in right may be stretched.
         Thirdly,Heires apparant, & infants of the State. concerning States that go by inheritance,
let it be considered who be the next apparant heires to
the State, either by the law of the Countrie, or the law
of Nature, or other pretences. Vnder which also let it be
noted, how, where, and after what order those infants
are brought vp, and what hope there is of them. Fourthly,A due consideration of the person of the Prince that ruleth.
what wisedome and discretion the Prince is of:
whether hee be wise enough to discerne the aduise of
his Councell, subtile enough to perceiue whether his

Councell plot more for their owne particulars then
for the publike good and honour of their Soueraigne:
or whether he rule not all things at his wil without consult
of his Councell: what spirit he is of, how studious
to warre and peace: what care and order the
Prince taketh to see good iustice done to euerie one;
and so of all other vertues that crowne Princes with
honor, and establish their gouernment: the like arise
of the Magistrates. But the contrarie must bee
gathered from the imperfections & vices of the Prince
and Magistrates, mutatis mutandis. Lastly, what choise
of persons the Prince hath about him for fauourites,
and whether hee carrieth an euen hand amongst them.
By which secrette the inclination of the PRINCE
and his abilitie and weakenesse maye bee concluded.
         Concerning the persons gouerned,The consideration of the people gouerned in sixe points. our assaie resteth
in sixe Considerations; First, whether the people
bee giuen to much libertie and so suffered to continue,
as in the State of Venice and through Italie: Secondly,
howe they stand affected to their Prince and
gouernment. Thirdly, whether the Commons suppose
not they see much into gouernment, and think
themselues wiser then the Councell of State: the which
is dangerous, whether the same be deriued from presumptiō
of Nature, or frō the inspectiō the people haue
into the gouernours cariage conuerting all things to
priuate commoditie.
         Fourthly, how the people stand affected in rumors
of warre, & like accidents. Fiftly, who are the persons in
greatest fauor and estimation amongst the people, besides
the Prince.
         
            
Lastly, whether the Nobilitie contemne not the
Commons and Citizens, and whether the Commons
hate and enuie not the Nobles in outward shew; the
which breedeth a great thirst after alteration, either of
religion or of policie: the one springing from
zeale, the other from malcontednesse and factiousnesse.
         The Instruments follow,The instrumētall secrets obserued in eight points. which likewise be the subiects
of many secrets and may be included vnder eight
heads, namely, vnder Dearth of the commodities of
the land▪ Secondly,1, Dearth. vnder Mortalitie of men, and the
heauie hand of God on the people. Thirdly,2 Mortalitie. vnder
the Losse of shipping,3, Lostes. of Munition and Dominions.
Fourthly,4. Defect of Iustice. vnder the Want of Iustice and good discipline.
Fiftly,5. Riot and expenses. vnder the extraordinarie cause of Expense,
or the lauishe spending of the treasure. Sixtly,6, Impositions.
vnder the strange Impositions and exactions on subiectes.
Seauenthly,7, The good or euill of the State. vnder the apprehension of that
which most impouerisheth or enricheth a State:
Lastly,8, Weaknesse of the State. vnder the knowledge of such Weake places
vpon the borders & confines and costes of the Countrie,
as also within the Land; wherein I would aduise
Trauailers to bee verie studious: for so much as this
point only is of great moment to bee well sought into.
Out of which there arise contrarie secreates, mutatis
mutandis:
Whereof, Trauailers cannot be ignorant,
being so common and familiar. Finally, about these
or any other, let not Trauailers omitte, to procure
with their purse, what by discretion, obseruation, and
friends, cannot be attained vnto. Thus much concerning
those sixe pointes of generall knowledge, that
accomplish the peregrination of men, and make them

compleate in knowledge of thinges.
         It now remaineth to handle briefly, the behauiour
of our Trauailer when he shall returne home, to liue afterwards
wel cōtented & happily: the which we see fewe
do. But afore wee can obserue the offices he must vnder
goe, when he commeth home; there are certain points,
of him to be performed before, to fit himself against his
returne, if so be he expect speciall grace and prefermēt
afterwards: which, being an honorable colour & spurre
of vertue, may neither bee neglected of Trauailers nor
indecided of vs. These rest chiefly in two points. First,Their discretiō vpon returning
in aduertising, frō time to time by Letters during their
trauaile, some one of the priuie Councell, and none other
of the Countrie to which they belong, of such occurrences
and things as chance worthie to be sent and
committed to consultation and viewe.
         Wherein, let Trauailers bee prouident to whom
they giue aduertisement: For, otherwise their labour
may bee lost, or crost with ingratitude and vnthankefulnesse.
Neither, is it necessarie that such a Councellor
should take knowledge of them before their
Trauaile: for this action will be get acquaintance, and
tie that Councellor afterwards to yeelde such an one
due respect. Neither is it conuenient for Trauailers to
aduertise any other whatsoeuer of those matters they
send to a Councellor, nor to aduertise many Councellors
of things: the one arguing lightnesse, the other
hazardeth the respect of those Councellors: vnlesse it be
apparant, that the Trauailer is many wayes tied to those
Councellors, in their owne knowledge. Wherein also,
hauing occasion to write of diuerse matters, let him
diuide those matters amongst them with discretion.

Moreouer, let our Trauailer take heede to aduertise an
vntruth for certaintie: but as touching reportes and rumors,
let him handle them discreetly; and touching diuinings,
probabilities and consequences, let thē be sparingly
or not at all set downe to Councellers whose
wisedome ought to haue the reference and collection
of them. But vnto other persons and friends they are
sensible and plausible enough. Lastly, in the sending
and dispatching of such letters to Councellers, wherein
are supposed to be importances, let our Trauailer bee
verie circumspect: for it were better for him not to
write at all, then by writing either to hazard himselfe or
bewraie imperfections. And therfore let him take heede
to aduertise any thing that is treasonable, or offensiue
to the State in which he remaineth: Vnlesse such light
vpon good and sound Messengers,Note. or vnlesse it concerne
the life and safetie of his Prince and Countrie: wherein
only hee ought to hazard his life: especially if his
Prince haue no Ambassadour in that State at the present.
         Hence springeth that second office to bee perfourmed
of our Trauailer, That hee make oft repaire to the
Ambassadour of his Prince (in case there remaine any
there) aduertising him of such importances as shall
chaunce vnto him in that Countrey, where hee abideth
with the Ambassadour, before hee committe the same
in writing to any Counceller at home: For that seemes
to derogate from the Ambassador (from whom all importances
are expected besides negotiations) and argueth
no good carriage of such a Trauailer, vnlesse in speciall
cases; namely, where the cause vrgeth haste to giue
aduertisement, which by distance from the Ambassador

can not so competently bee dispatched, if the same
should be first giuen vnto him; and where the Ambassadour
is no friend of that Trauailer. For it is the
office of euery Subiect thus trauailing, whether hee
goe out of the Land, with his Princes Ambassadour,
or be in trauaile before, or trauaile afterwards,
to giue attendance on his Princes Ambassador, especially
going to the Court. For that is an honour to
his Nation and Prince, and a point of ciuilitie belonging
to the person of an Ambassador; that equalleth,
during his legation, any Subiect in the worlde, if so
such an one be resident, or neere his person. Of which
humanitie an Ambassadour cannot be vnsensible, no
more than the Councellor written vnto, but is tied to
haue his discretion and wisedome in recommendation:
which oft turneth to the good of Trauailers, when
they returne home to their Countrey.
         Thus hauing brought home our Trauailer,Sixe points to be perpended of Trauailers being returned. there
rest onely sixe offices to be vnder gone of him, whereby
he shall reape contentment, honour, and estimation.
The first is, that he manifest vnto all men his vncorrupt
and vnspotted Religion,1. Manifestation of sound Religion. and zeale therein;
Not onely in the due and orderly going to Church,
and seruing of God, but making expression therof by
the fruits of all vertues, demeanours, and actions, and
that singularly in sixe habilities and vertues: namely,
Silence; which vseth few words, but fitly, and to purpose.
Incuriositie; which banisheth all affectations,
and apish trickes, and fashions of other nations,
that are not more estimable then those of ones owne
Countreys Customs and vses. Spirit; which shall free
them from reproche, quarrels, and putting vp of dishonourable

iniuries; making him equally sensible with
the Italianated Duellist, but farre more iudiciall to take
iust acception, and make risentiment. Prudence,
which being a discreet Councellor, shal direct all his
words and actions according to reason, and to their
proper ends. Bounty, which strippeth him of couetousnesse:
which in Trauailers is hateful, and rellisheth
of dishonesty. Lastly, Faithfulnesse, and sociablenesse;
which shall enable him for all companies, to be both
honestly thought of and regarded: the which is free
from offering wrong, from Lust and Sensualitie, that
dissolue loue and societie.2. Honestie before policie. The second office is, that he
preferre not policie before honestie, or equall with it,
either in matters affecting Honour, Wealth, or Reuenge;
whereof the Conscience must be a director
and a Counsellor.3, To be known by vertuous indeuours. The third is, that he make himselfe
knowen to the Prince and Councell, by commendable
means onely, in whose hands rest preferment, and
are to be supposed to esteeme men according to their
worth and merit.4, To be stored of a worthy friend. The fourth is in the choice such an
one must make, to procure him an honorable friend,
as is able to haue him in recōmendation to his Prince:
such an one as is not of a couetous minde, but loueth
vertue, and that hath credence with the Prince, & that
is magnanimous, and more feared for his vprightnes,
thā hated for his policie according to Machiauel. Fiftly,5, Constancie without ambition.
being thus known vnto the Councel, that he couet
not special fauor, after the guise of a sycophāt, or after
an ambitious maner of any other persons; but that he
make shew of a constant and an vnderstanding Gentlemen.
Moreouer, though it be requisite, to be thus
generally knowen of all: yet let such take heede, to intrude

into the friendship of any, but with great respect,
and for good cause: vsing modestie and sparingnesse
euermore in reuealing of any thing obserued
in trauaile, vnlesse vpon demands, and in vrgent
causes; and seldome any thing of a strange and incredible
nature, but to familiars, and in priuate. Lastly,
in our sixt point, let our Trauailer from time to time
procure of other Trauailers, Merchants, and others,6, Diligence & trauailing at home for aduertisments.
such things as they haue obserued (for it is a thing impossible
for one man to obserue all things fully in a
small time, required in trauailing to be knowen, as we
haue considered in the sixe generall points of knowledge)
comparing them with his owne; as with such
bookes as happily haue discoursed of them. Finally, let
him plot to haue dayly intelligence (if so be hee liue
from the Court retired) of euery accident forreine
and domesticke in the Court, Land, and Citie: by the
which the obseruations made in trauaile, shal be kept
in continuall tilthe; and being well husbanded, shall
occasion, at the least, sweete contentment (the onely
pleasure in the world, which no worldling can obtaine)
if not aduancement in the State to doe more
good than priuate persons in the Church and Common-weale,
which is the godly and proper ende of
our trauaile and pilgrimage here on earth, that thereby
God may be singularly glorified, the Prince serued,
the Common-weale and Church benefited, and
our selues prepared for a greater happinesse, then can
bee represented in any contentment in this life. The
which I hartily wish to be respected of all that intend
trauaile, and to all, in all perfection.
         FINIS.
      
   
