<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         
         Quo vadis?
         A IVST CENSVRE of TRAVELL as it is commonly vndertaken by the GENTLEMEN of our Nation.
         By IOS. HALL D. of Diuinitie.
         LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for Nathaniel Butter. 1617.
      
      
         
         
         TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, my singular good Lord, EDWARD Lord DENNY, Baron of WALTHAM.
         Right Honorable,
         I Feuer any men had reason to bee in loue with the face of a forraine entertainment, those are they, which

were admitted to the attendance of the truly Generous and Honorable, Lord HAY, your most noble sonne, in his late embassage to France; in which number my vnworthinesse was allowed to make oe; who ca therefore well witnesse, that no man could either receie more honour from a strange Countrey, or doe more honour to his owne. What wanted there that might make men confesse themselues more welcome then strangers? Neither doubt I but that after many ages, France it selfe will wonder at the bountifull expressons of her own fauours. But whiles others were nioying the noble courtesies of the Time, my

thoughts entertained themselues with searching into the proofe of that ordinary Trauell, wherewith I saw men commnly affected; which, I must needs confesse, the more I saw, the lesse I liked. Neither is it in the power of any forraine munificence, to make mee thinke ours any where so well as at home. Earthly commodities are no part of my thought: I looked (as I ought) at the soule; which I ell saw, vses not only to gather  mosse in this rolling, but suffers the best graces it bath, o molder away insensibly in such vnnecessary agitation. I haue now beene twise abroad: both times (as thinking my selfe worthy of nothing

but neglect) I bent my eyes vpon others, to see what they did, what they got: my inquirie found our spirituall losse so palpable, that now at last my heart could not chuse but breake forth at my hand, and tell my Countrymen of the dangerous issue of their curiositie. I meddle not with the common iourneyes to the miner all waters of the Spa; to which many sicke soules are beholden for a good excuse: who whiles they pretend the medicinall vse of that spring, can freely quaffe of the puddle of popish superstition; poisoning the better part, in stead of helping the worse. These I leaue to the best Physician, Authoritie; which if it

may please to vndertake the cure, may perhaps saue as many English soules from infection, as that water cures bodies of diseases. I deale only with those, that professe to seeke the glory of a perfect breeding, and the perfection of that, which we call Ciuilitie, in Trauell: of which sort I haue (not without indignation) seene too many lose their hopes, and themselues in the way; returning as empty of grace, and other vertues, as full of words, vanitie, mis-dispositions. I dedicate this poore discourse to your Lo: as (besides my daily renued obligations) congratulating to you the sweet libertie and happy vse of your home; who like a fixed starre

            
            
            
            
may well ouer-looke these planets, and by your constant settlednesse, giue that aime to inferiour eies, which shall be in vaine expected from a wandring light. The God of beauen, to whose glorie I haue intended this weake labour, giue it fauor in the ight of his Church, and returne it backe; but with this good newes that any one of the son of Iaphet, is hereby perswaded to dwell euer in the tents of Sem: Vnto that diuine protection, I humbly betake your Lo: Iustly vowing my selfe
         
            Your Lo: humbly deuoted in al faithfull and Christian obseruance,
IOS. HALL.
         
      
   
   
      
         
         QVO VADIS?
         
            Sect. 1.
            IT is an ouer-rigorous construction of the workes of God, that in moting our ILAND with the Ocean he ment to shut vs vp from other regions; For God himselfe that made the Sea, was the Author of Nauigation, and hath therein taught vs to set vp a wooden bridge, that may reach to the very Antipodes themselues: This were to seeke discontentment in the bounty of God, who hath placed vs apart, for the singularity of our

happinesse, not for restraint.
            There are two occasions wherein Trauell may passe, Matter of trafique, and Matter of State. Some commodities GOD hath confined to some countries, vpon others hee hath with a full hand powred those benefits, which hee hath but sprinkled vpon some. His wise prouidence hath made one Countrey the Granary, another the Celler, another the Orchard, another the Arsenall of their neighbours, yea of the remotest parts. The earth is the Lords which he meant not to keepe in his hands, but to giue; and hee which hath giuen no man his faculties and graces for himselfe, nor put light into the Sun, Moone, Stars for their owne vse, hath stored no parcell of earth with a purpose of priuate reseruation. Salomon would neuer haue sent his nauie

for Apes and Peacockes, but yet held gold and timber for the building of Gods house, and his own, worthy of a whole three yeares voyage: The sea and earth are the great Cofers of God; the discoueries of Nauigation are the keyes, which whosoeuer hath receiued, may know that he is freely allowed to vnlocke these chests of nature, without any neede to picke the wards: Wise Salomons comparison is reciprocall. A ship of Merchants that fetches her wares from farre is the good Hus-wife of the Common-wealth, and if she were so in those blind voyages of antiquity, which neuer saw needle nor card, how much more thrifty must shee needes be in so many helpes both of nature and Art? Either Indies may be searched for those treasures, which God hath laid vp in them for their fardistant

owners; Onely let our Merchants take heed, least they go so farre, that they leaue God behinde them; that whiles they buy all other things good cheape, they make not an ill match for their soules, least they end their prosperous aduentures in the shipwracke of a good conscience.
         
         
            Sect. 2.
            And for matter of policy, nothing can be more plaine then that our correspondence with other nations cannot possibly be held vp, without intelligence of their estate, of their proceedings; The neglect whereof were no other then to prostrate our selues to the mercie of an hollow friendship, and to stand still, and willingly lie open whiles wee are plaide vpon by the wit of vntrusty neighbourhood. Thse eyes and eares of State are necessarie to the well-being of the head; In which number I doe not

include those priuate Inter-lopers of intelligence, that lie abroad only to feed some vaine Cameleons at home with the aire of Newes, for no other purpose, saue idle discourse; but only those profitable agents, whose industrie either fitteth them abroad for publike imployment, or imployeth them after due maturitie, in the fit seruices of the Common-wealth: Neither my censure nor my direction reaches to either of these occasions. It is the Trauell of curiosity wherwith my quarrell shall bee maintained; the inconueniences whereof my owne Senses haue so sufficiently witnessed, that if the wise parents of our Gentry could haue borrowed mine eyes for the time, they woud euer learne to keepe their sonnes at home, and not wilully beate themselues with the taffe of their age: vpon them let

my pen turne a little, as those that are more then accessaries to this both priuate and publike mischiefe.
         
         
            Sect. 3.
            It is the affectation of too-early ripenesse that makes them prodgall of their childrens safety an hopes; for, that they may be wi betimes, they send them foo to the world in the minority bo of age and iudgement, like as fon Mothers vse to send forth the daughters on frosting, early in col mornings (though into the mi of a vaporous and foggy ayre) an whiles they striue for a colo loose their health; If they were n blinded with ouer-weening a desire, they could not but see  their vnsetlednesse carries in it manifest perill of mi-carriag grant that no danger were threned by the place, experience gi vs, that a weake-limde childe if 
               
be suffered to vse his legges too soone, too muh, lames himselfe for euer; bu if hee wake in vneuen ground, he is no lese subiect to maimes, then crookednesse. Do they not see how easily a young twig is bowed any way Do they not see that the Mid-wi and the Nurse are wont to frame the gristly head of the Infant to any fahion? May not any thing be written vpon a blanke? And if they make choice of this age, because it is most docible, and for that they would take the day before them, why doe they not consider that it s therefore more docible of eill; ince wickednesse is both more  and more plausible then ertue, especially when it meetes with an vntutored iudge; and inc 
               here is so much inequality of he umber of both, that it is not ore hard to finde vertue, then to

               
               
               
               
misse vice. Heare this then, yee carelesse Ostriches, that leaue your egges in the open sand for the Sun to hatch, without the feare of any hooe that may crush them in peecs, haue your stomackes resolued to digest the hard newes of the ruine of your children? Doe ye professe anmity to your owne loynes? then turne them (as ye doe) loose to these dangers, ere they cn resist, ere they can discerne; but if ye had rather they should liue and grow, bestow vpon them the kindly heat of your bet plumes, and shelter them with your owne brest and wings, till nature haue opened a seasonable way to their owne abilities.
         
         
            Se. 4.
            Yea let it be my iust complaint in this place, that in the very transplantation of our sonnes to the saer soile of our owne Vniuersities, and Innes of Court, nothing

is more preiudiciall then speede. Perfection is the childe of Time; neither was there euer any thing excellent, that required not meet leisure: but besides, how commonly is it seene, that those which had wont to swimme onely with bladders, sinke when they come first to trust their owne armes? These Lap-wings that goe from vnder the wing of their damme with their shell on their heads, run wilde. If Tutors be neuer so carefull of their early charge, much must be left to their owne disposition; which if it leade them not to good, not only the hopes of their youth, but the proofe of their age lies bleeding. It is true, that as the French Lawyers say merily of the Normans, which by a speciall priuiledge are reputed of full age at 21. yeeres, whereas the other French stay for their fiue and

twentieth, that Malitia supplet aetatem; so may I say of the younglings of our time, that Precocitie of vnderstanding supplieth age and stature: but as it is commonly seene, that those blossomes which ouer-runne the spring, and will be looking forth vpon a FebruarySunne, are nipped soone after with an Aprill-frost, when they should come to the knitting: so is it no lesse ordinary that these rathe-ripe wits preuent their owne perfection, and after a vaine wonder of their haste, end either in shame, or obscuritie. And as it thus falles out euen in our Vniuersities (the most absolute and famous Seminaries of the world) where the Tutors eye supplies the parents; so must it needs much more, in thse free and honourable Innes (as they are called, for their libertie, Colledges for their vse) of our

English Gentry, wherein each one is his owne master in respect of his priuate studie and gouernment: where there are many pots boiling, there cannot but bee much scumme. The concourse of a populous citie affords many brokers of villanie, which liue vpon the spoiles of young hopes, whose very acquaintance is destruction. How can these nouices, that are turned loose into the maine, ere they know either coast, or compasse, auoid these rockes and shelues, vpon which both their estates and soules are miserably wracked? How commonly doe they learne to roare in stead of pleading, and in stead of knowing the lawes, learne how to conternne them? We see, and rue this mischiefe, and yet I know not how carelesse we are in preuenting it.
            How much more desperate

must it then needs be to send forth our children into those places which are professedly infectious, whose very goodnesse is either impietie, or superstition? If wee desired to haue sonnes poisoned with mis-beeefe, what could wee doe otherwise? Or what else doe those parents, which haue bequeathed their children to Antichristianisme? Our late iourney into France informed me of some ordinary factors of Rome, whose trade is the transporting and placing of our popish nouices beyond the seas; one whereof (whose name I noted) hath beene obserued to carry ouer sixe seuerall charges in one yere. Are wee so foolish to goe their way, whiles wee intend a contrary period? Doe wee send our sonnes to learne to be chaste in the midst of Sodome? The world is wide and open; but our ordinary

trauell is southward, into the iawes of danger: for so farre hath Satans policie preuailed, that those parts which are only thought worth our viewing, are most contagious; and will not part with either pleasure, or information, without some tang of wickednesse. What can wee pleade for our confidence, but that there is an houshold of righteous Lot in the midst of that impure citie; that there are houses in this lericho, which haue scarlet threeds shining in their windowes; that in the most corrupted aire of Poperie, some well reformed Christians draw their breath, and sweeten it with their respiration. Blessed bee God, that hath reared vp the towers of his Sion, in the midst of Babylon. Wee must acknowledge, not without much gratulation to the Gospell of Christ, that in the very hottest climates of opposition,

it findes many clients, but more friends; and in those places, where authortie hath pleaed to giue more aire to the truth, would haue had many more, if the Retormed part had happily continued that correspondnce in some circumstances wih the Romane Church, which the Church of Englan hath hitherto maintained. God is my record how re my heart is both from paalitic, and priudie. Mine eyes and eares can witnesse with wha approoe and applause diuer of the Catholiques Royall (as they are termed) entertained the new-tranlated Liturgie o our Church, as maruelling to see such order and regular deuotion in them, whom they were taught to condemne for hereticall. Whose allowances I wll saw, might with a little helpe, haue beene raised higher, from the practise

of our Church, to some points of our iudgement. But if true religion were in those parts yet better attended, and our young Traueller could finde moe abettors, and examples of pieie, on whom wee might relie, yet how safe can it bee to trust young eyes with the view and censure of truth or alshood in religion? especially when truth brings nothing to this barre, but extreme simplicitie, and contrarily, alshood, a gaw dy magnificence, and proud maiestie of pompous ceremonies, wherewith the hearts of children and fooles are easily taken. That Curtizan of Rome (according to the mannr of that profession) sets out her selfe to sale in the most tempting fashion; here want no colours, no perumes, no wanton dreses; whereas the poore Spouse of Christ can ony say of her selfe, I am blacke,

but comely. When on the one side they shall see such rich shrines, garish Altars, stately Processions, when they shall see a Pope adored of Emperours, Cardinals preferd to Kings, confessors made Saints, little children made Angels, in a word nothing not outwardly glorious: on the other side, a seruice without welt or guard, whose maiestie is all in the heart, none in the face, how easily may they incline to the conceit of that Parisian dame, who seeing the procession of S. Genoueifue goe by the streets, could say, (O que belle, &c.) How fine a religion is ours in comparison of the Hugenots? Whereto must bee added, that (supposing they doe not carry with them, but rather goe to fetch the language of the place) some long time needs be spent, ere they can receiue any helpe to their deuotion; whiles in

the meane season, their vnthriuing intermiion is assailed with a thousand suggestions: And who sees not that this lucrum cessans (as the Ciuilans terme it) offers an open aduantage to a bue aduersarie?
         
         
            Sect. 6.
            In a word, it hath beene the old praise of early rising, that it makes a man healthfull, holy, and rich; whereof the first respects the body, the second the soule, the third the estate: all fals out contrary in an early trauell. For health: The wise prouidence of God hath so contriued his earth, and vs, that he hah fitted our bodies to our clime, and the natiue sustenance of the place vnto our bodies. The apparant difference of diet (and of drinkes especially) falling into so tender age, must needs cause a iarre in the constitution; which cannot in all likelihood, but send forth distemper into the whole

course of the ensuing life. The streame runnes like the fountaine, and speeds well, if at last, by many changes of soile it can leaue an ill qualitie behinde it: besides that the mis-gouernance of diet, whereto their libertie layes them open in the weaknesse of their pupillage, cannot but bee extremely preiudiciall. In this point let experience be consulted with; her vnpartiall sentence shall easily tell vs, how few young trauellers haue brought home, sound and strong, and (in a word) English bodies. As for holinesse, we lose our labour, if this discourse proue not that it hath none so great enemie as timely trauell; at once doe wee hazard to abandon God and our home: set an empty pitcher to the fire, it crackes presently, whereas the full will abide boiling. It was the younger sonne in the Gospell, who

therefore turnes vnthrift, because he got his portion too soone into his hands, and wandred into a farre countrey. The eye of the parent, and the ferule of the master, is all too little to bring our sonnes to good. Where then there is neither restraint of euill, nor helps to grace, how should their condition bee other than hopelesse? The soile doth much in many plants: the Persian Hyosyamus if it be translated to Egypt, proues deadly; if to Ierusalem, safe and wholesome: neither is it otherwise with some dispositions, which may iustly curse the place, as accessory to their vndoing. Lastly, for riches, not of the purse, (which is not here thought of) but of the mind, what can bee expected from that age, which is not capable of obseruation, carelee of reposition? whereof the one gets, the other keepes

the treasure of our vnderstanding. What is this age fit to looke after but Butterflies, or birds nests, or perhaps the gay coat of a Courtier? And if remarkable considerations be put into it by others, they are as some loose pearles, which for want of filing vpon a string, shake out of our pockets; so as all the wealth of a young Traueller is only in his tongue, wherein he exceeds his mothers Parrat at home, both for that hee can speake more, and knowes that he speaketh.
         
         
            Sect. 7.
            And in truth, it is not onely in trauell, wherein wee may iustly complaine of the inconuenience of haste, but (that wee may looke a little aside) in all the important businesses of our life; especially in marriages and professions; The ordinary haste in the one (before the face can descry the sex) fils the world full of beggerie and impotence;

and no lesse haste in the other, fils it as full of ignorance and imperfection. For on the one side, where the vigour of nature wants, what can be propagated but infirmity, or how can hee skill to liue that wants experience? On the other, what plenty of water can there be, where the leade of the cisterne is put all into the pipes? Where those that should be gathering knowledge for themselues, spend it (like vnthrifty heires) vpon others, as fast as they get it. I am deceiued, if I haue not touched one of the maine grounds of that vniuersall decay of Arts and Men, wherewith the world is commonly checked: They must bee mightier and wiser, that know to redresse it.
         
         
            Sect. 8.
            But let vs giue our Traueller (that which Parents seldome care to giue) maturity of age; let him be as ripe as time can make him;

what is the best aduantage which his absence can promise vs: Let vs lay the benefits of Trauell in the one scae, the inconueniences on the other, whethersoeuer ouerwaighes, shall sway downe the beame of our iudgement. The priuate contentment of a mans owne heart in the view o forraine things, is but a better name of an humorous curioity. If a man yeelde to runne after his appetite and his eye, he shall neuer know where to ret, and after many idle excursions, hal lie downe weary, but vnsaisied. For, giue me a man that hath seene udasses Lanterne at S. Dennises, the Epheian iana in the Louure, the great vessell at Heydelberg, the Amphitheater at ismes, the ruines and halfe-lettred monuments of the seuen hilles, and a thousand such rarities; what peace hath his heart aboue those, that sit at home,

and contemne these toyes? And what if that mans fancie shall call him to the stables of the great Mogol, or to the solemnities of Mecha, or to the Librarie of the Mounaine of the Moone, will hee be so farre the drudge or Lacquay of his owne imagination, as to vndertake his pilgrimage? Or where will he stay at last, vpon his returne? If he haue smelt the ill-sented Cities of France, or haue seene faire Florence, rich Venice, proud Genua, Luca the industrious: if then his thoughts shall tempt him to see the rich gluttons house in Ierusalem, or inuite him to Asmere, or Bengala, must he goe? And if hee can denie and chide his owne vnprofitable desires at the last, why began hee no sooner? That could not be forborne too early, which at last we repent to haue done: he therefore that trauels onely to please his fantasie,

is like some woman with childe, that longs for that peece which she sees vpon anothers trencher, and swounds if she miss it; or some squire of Dames, tha doats vpon euery beautie, and is euery day loue-sicke anew: These humours are fitter for controlment, than obseruation.
         
         
            Sect. 9.
            It is an higher facultie that Trauell professeth to aduance, the supreme power of our vnderstanding, which if from hence it may be manifestly improued, he should not bee worthy to tread vpon the earth, that would not emulate Drake, and Candish, in compassing it: but (set aside the studie of Ciuill Law, which indeed findes bettr helpes abroad) all sciences (the word may seeme proud, but is true) may be both more fitly wooed, and more surely wonne within our foure seas: for what learning

is that, which the Seas, or Alpes, or Pyrenees haue ingrossed from vs? what profession either liberall, or manuary, wherein the greatest masters haue not beene at least equalled by our hom-bred Ilanders? what hath this, or the former age knowne more eminent for learning, then some of ours, whih haue neuer trod on any but thir owne earth? And (as good market-men by one handfull iudge of all the whole sacke) why may we not finde cause to thinke so of the rest, if they would not be wanting to themselues? I am sure the Vni uersities of our Iland know no matches in all the world; vnto whose peretion (that as they exceed others, so they may no lesse exceed themselues) nothing wanteth, but seuere execution of the wise and carefull lawes of our Ancestors, and restraint o that libertie,

               
               
               
               
which is the common disease of the time. And why should not the childe thriue as well with the mothers milke, as with a strangers? Whether it be the enuie, or the pusillanimitie of vs English, wee are still ready to vnder-value our owne, and admire forrainers; whiles other nations haue applauded no professors more then those which they haue borrowed from vs; neither haue wee beene so vnwise, as to lend forth our best: our neighbours (which should be our corriuals in this praise) shall be our Iudges, if those fw of our writers, which could be drawne forth into the publike light, haue not set copies to the rest of the world, not without iust admiration. And how many starres haue wee of no lesse magnitude, that will not be seene? Blessed be God (who hath made this word as true, as it is great) no

nation vnder heauen so aboundeth with all varietie of learning, as this Iland. From the head of Gods anointed doth this sweet perfume distill to the vtmost skirts of this our region. Knowledge did neuer sit crowned in the throne of maiestie, and wanted either respect, or attendance. The double praise which was of old giuen to two great nations, That Italie could not be put down for armes, nor Greece for learning, is happily met in one Iland. Those therefore that crosse the seas to fill their braine, doe but trauell Northward for heat, and seeke that candle which they carry in their hand.
         
         
            Sect. 10.
            Yea so farre is our ordinary Trauell from perfecting the intellectiue powers of our Gentry, that it rather robs them of the very desire of perfection. For what discouragements shall they finde

from the loue of studies, in those parts which are most sough to for ciuilitie? Who kow not that they are growne to that height of debauchment, as to hold learning a shame to Nobilitie; esteeming it as a fit gard for the lng robe only, too base for their Tisses? An opinion so sauouring of proud ignorance, and ignorant looseness, tha I cannot honour it with a confutation. Who would thinke that the reasonable soule of men, not professedly barbarous, should bee capable of such a monster? What is learning, but reason improued? And can reason so farre degenerate, as to hate and contemne it selfe? Were these men made onely for a sword, or a dogge, or an horse? Onely for sport, or execution? I know not wherein Lewi the eleuenth shewed himselfe vnwitty, but in the charge which hee

gaue to his sonne, to learne no more Latine, but, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit viuere: and would this alone teach him to rule well? Doth the Art of Arts (such is the gouernment of men) require no grounds but dissimulation, or ignorance? Euen to the feeding of hogges, or sheepe, there is more and better skill necessary. How vlike is this to a successor of Charles the great, whose word it had wont to be, that he had rather abound in knowledge, then wealth? In the Court of our King Henry the eight, a certaine great Peere (of this diet) could say, it was enough for Noblemens sonnes to winde their horne, and carry their Hauke faire; that studie was for the children of a meaner ranke: To whom Pace iustly replied, that then Noblemen must bee content that their children many winde

their hornes, and carry their Haukes, while meaner mens sons doe weild the affaires of State. Certainly it is a blinde and lame gouernment that lackes learning; whose subiects, what are they else, but as limmes of a body whose head wanteth senses, which must needs therefore faile of either motion, or safetie? From hence it is, that so few of the forraine Noblesse are studious, in comparison of ours; (in which regard I am not ashamed to recant that which my vnexperience hath (out of hearesay) written in praise of the Frenc education) and those few that haue stolne the turning ouer of bookes, hide their skill, left they should be made to blush at their vertue. What braue Trophees and rich monuments hath the pen of our gracious Soueraigne raised of himselfe vnto all posterities? When

ignorance and malice haue shot their bolt, the glory of his great wisdome, and knowledge, shall more fill the mouthes and affect the hearts of all succeeding ages, then of his greatnesse. Paul the fift, and his greatest Chaplaines, Bellarmine and Perron, haue felt the weight of his hand; whereas the great King that stiles himselfe Catholike, when he comes to passe his censorious edict vpon Cardinall Baronius (who in the eleuenth Tome of his Historie seemed too busie in fastening the title of theEdicto del ey Dn Phelipped Espana cotra el Trct ad della Monria d Scila exerid por Cesar Baronio Cardenal, on el Tmo vndecim de  Annales Ecclsistics. Kingdome of Sicilie vpon the Pope) professeth to ground his intelligence of this wrong only vpon others eyes; as if a booke (though of a Cardinall) were too meane an obiect for the view of Maiesty: and as all subordinate greatnes flowes from the head, so doe commonly also the dispositions. Neither haue

the Doctours of the Romish Church (vpon whom the implicit faith of the Laitie is suspended) found it any ill policie, to cherish this dislike of bookishnesse in the great; for, whiles the candle is out, it is safe for them to play their trickes in the darke: and if the Assyrians be once blinded, how easily may they bee led into the midst of any Samara? If the light of knowledge might freely hine to the world, Poperie would soone bee ashamed of it selfe, and vanish amongst the workes of darknesse. Now how well these examples, and this conuersation, shall whet the appetite vnto good studies, it cannot be hard to iudge.
         
         
            Sect. 11.
            But perhaps it is not the learning of the schoole, but of the State, wherein our Traueller hopes for perfection: The site and forme of cities, the fashions of gouernment,

the manners of people, the raising and rate of forraine reuenues, the deportment of Courts, the menaging both of warre and peace, is that wherein his owne eye shall be his best intelligencer; The knowledge whereo shall wll requite his labour, whether for discourse or for vse. What if I say, that (saue the soothing vp of our fancy in all this) these lessons may bee as well taken out at home: I haue knowen some that haue trauelled no further then their owne closet, which could both teach and correct the greatest Traueller, after all his tedious and costly pererrations, what doe wee but lose the benefit of so many iournals, maps, hystoricall descriptions, relations, if we cannot with these helps, trauell by our owne fire-side? Hee that trauels into forraine countries, talkes perhaps with a Peasant, or a

Pilgrim, or a Citizen, or a Courtier; and must needs take such information as partiall rumour, or weake coniecture can giue him; but hee that trauels into learned and credible Authors, talkes with them who haue spent themselues in bolting out the truth of all passages; and who hauing made their labours publike, would haue beene like to heare of it, if they had mis-reported: The ordinary Traueller propounds some prime Cities to himselfe, and thither hee walkes right forward, if he meet with ought that is memorable in the way, hee takes it vp; but how many thousand matters of note fall beside him, on either hand; of the knowledge whereof he is not guilty; Whereas ome graue and painefull Author hath collected into one view, whatsoeuer his country affords worthy of marke; hauing measured many

a fowle step for that, which we may see dry-shod; and worne out many yeeres in the search of that, which one houre shall make no lesse ours, then it was his owne. To which must be added, that our vnperfit acquaintance may not hope to finde so perfect information on the sudden, as a naturall inhabitant may get, by the disquisition of his whole life: Let an Italian or French passenger walk through this our Iland, what can his Tablebookes carry home, in comparison of the learned Britaine of our Camden, or the accurate Tables of Speed? Or if one of ours should (as too many doe) passe the Alpes, what pittances can his wilde iourney obserue, in comparison of the Itenerary of Fr. Schottus and Capugnanus: Or he that would discourse of the Royalties of the French Lillies, how can hee bee so furnished

by flying report, as by the elaborate gatherings of Cassaneus, or of Degrassalius; What should I bee infinite? This age is so full of light, that there is no one country of the habitable world, whose beames are not crossed and interchanged with other; Knowledge of all affaires, is like musicke in the streets, whereof those may partake, which pay nothing; Wee doe not lie more open to one common snnne, then to the eyes and pens of our neighbours; Euen China itselfe, and Iaponia, and those other remotest Isles, & continents (which haue taken the strictest order for closenesse) haue receiued such discoueries, as would rather satisfie a Reader, then prouoke him to amend them. A good booke is at once the best companion, and guide, and way, and end of our iourney; Necessity droue our forefathers

out of doores, which else in those misty times had seene no light, we may with more ease, and no lesse profit sit still, and inherit, and enioy the labours of them, & our elder brethen, who haue purchased our knowledge with much hazard, time, toile, expence; and haue beene liberall of their bloud (some of them) to leaue vs rich.
         
         
            Sect. 12.
            As for that verball discourse, wherein I see some place the felicity of their trauell (thinking it the onely grace, to tell wonders to a ring of admiring ignorants) it is easie to answer; that table-talk is the least care of a wise man; who like a deepe streame desires rather to runne silent; and as himselfe is seldome transported with wonder, so doth he not affect it in others; reducing all to vse, rather then admiration, and more desiring to benefit, then astonish the hearer;

withall, that the same means which enable vs to know, d at oce furnish vs with matter of disourse, & for the forme of our expression, if it proceede not from that naturall dexterity which we carry with vs, in vaine shall wee hope to bring it home; the change of language is rather an hinderance to our former readinesse; and if some haue fetcht new noses, and lips, and eares from Italy (by the helpe of Tagliacotius, & his schollers) neuer any brought a new tongue from thence. o conclude, if a man would giue himselfe leaue to bee thus vaine and free, like a mill without a scluse, let him but trauell through the world of bookes, & he shall easily be able to out-talke that tongue, whose feet haue walkt the furthest; what ath any eye seene, or imagination deuised, which the pen hath not dared to write? Out of our bookes

can we tell the stories of the Monocelli, who lying vpon their backes, shelter themselues from the sunne with the shadow of their one only foot. We can tell of those cheapedieted men, that liue about the head of Ganges, without mea, without mouthes, feeding onely vpon aire at their nosthrils. Or of those headlesse Easterne people, that haue their eyes in their breasts (a mis-conceit arising from their fashion of attire, which I haue sometimes seene): Or of those Coromande, of whom Pliny speaks, that couer their whole body with their eares: Or of the persecutors of S. Thoma of Canterbury, whose posteritie (if wee beleeue the conident writings of Degraalius) are borne with long and hairie tailes, souping after them; which (I imagine) gaue occasion to that prouerbiall iest, wherewith our mirth

vses to vpbraid the Kentish: Or of Amzons, or Pygmes, or Satyres, or the Samarcaudean Lambe, which growing out of the earth by the nauell, grazeth so are as that natural 
               ther will reach: Or of the bird Ruc, or ten thousand such miracles, whether of nature, or euent Little neede wee to stirre our feet to leae to tell either loud lies, or large ruth. Wee haue heard a bird in a cage ing more change of otes, then others haue done i the wilde libertie of the wood And as for the present occurrences of he time, the world about vs is so full of Presses, that it may, and s growe so good a fellow, that it will, impart what it knowes to all the neighbours: whose relations, if sometimes oey swarue from truth, we may well consider, what varietie of report euery accident will yld; and hat therefore

our eares abroad are no whit more credible, then our eyes at home. Yea rather, as Tully could say, that at Antium he could heare the newes of Rome, better then at Rome; so may wee oft-times better heare and see the newes of France, or Spaine, vpon our Exchange, then in their Paris, or Madrill: Since (what libertie soeuer tongues may take to themselues) a discreet man will be ashamed to subscribe his name to that, whereof hee may bee afterwards conuinced.
         
         
            Sect. 13.
            Since therefore Trauell cannot out-bid vs in these highest commodities, which concerne the wealth of the minde; all the aduantage it can afford vs, must bee in those mixt abilities, wherein our bodies are the greatest partners, as dancing, encing, musicke, vaulting, horsemanship; the only professions

of the mis-named Academies of other nations. Who can denie that such like exercises are fit for young Gentlemen, not onely for their present recreation, but much more for the preparing of them to more serious action? Yet must these learne to know their places: what are they else but the varnish of that picture of Gentry, whose substance consists in the lines and colours of true vertue? but the lace or facing of a rich garment? but the hang-byes of that royall court which the soule keeps in a generous heart? He that holds Gentilitie accomplished with these (though laudable) qualities, partakes more of his horse, then his horse can possibly of him. This skill then is worthy of our purchase, yet may not bee bought too deare; and perhaps need not bee fetch't so farre. Neither my profession,

nor my experience will allow mee to hold comparisons in this kinde; but I haue beene heartened by no meane masters of these Arts, to say that our Nation hath yeelded some in all these faculties, which need not stoope vnto the proudest orrainer: ours haue no fault but one, that they are our owne; and what hh their Countrey offended, if their Art offend not? It is an humorous giddinesse to measure the goodne of any thing by the distance of miles, and where there is equalitie of worth, to neglect the neerest. I slander our Nation if it bee not sicke of this disease, in the course of all sciences. And if neerenesse and presence bee the cause of our dislike, why doe wee not hate our selues, which are euer in our owne bosomes? Why doe we not hate this fastidious curiositie, which is

too close to vs? Perhaps perfection in these qualities is thinner sowne amongst vs, then some other-where; so as our Iland for want of worke, and incouragement, affords not such multitude of masters: but how can wee complaine of rarenesse, since if our age yeeld vs but one excellent in each kinde, it is more then wee are willing to vse? and if the fault were not in our selues, one candle may light a thousand. To instance in the best: The horse is a noble crature, which as it is the strngth and pride of France, so wins the hearts and heeles of that Nation: The generalitie of their skill is nothing to a stranger; each priate mans cunning rests in himselfe; it is only the Teacher, whose abilitie may concerne vs. And whereas there is a double kinde of menage (as I haue heard) one for seruice, the other

for pleasure; in the first our masters thinke they cannot yeeld vnto the best; in the latter, if they grant themselues exceeded, how many men haue taught their dogge the same trickes, with no lesse contentment? In both, we haue the written directions of their greatest Artists; who (for the perpetuitie of their owne honour) failed not to say their best. And if these dead masters suffice not, wee haue had, wee may haue the best of their liuing: The conscience of a mans excellencie will abide no limits, but spurres him forth to winne admiration abroad; and if therewithall he can finde aduancement of profit, how willingly doth hee change his home? Wee haue had experience of this in higher professions, much more in these vnder foot. One obscure towne of Holland in our memory, had by this

meanes drawne together at once the greatest lights of EVROPE, and made it selfe then no lesse renowned for Professors, then it is now infamous for Schisme. Feare of enuy forbids me to name those amongst vs, which haue honoured this Iland in the choice of their abode. Where Art is encouraged, it will soone rise high, and go farre, and not suffer a channell of the sea to stay it from the presence of a more bountifull patronage.
         
         
            Sect. 14.
            But let vs grant these faculties so fixed vpon any nation, that all our water must necessarily bee fetcht at their Well; and adde vnto these a few wate complements, and mimicall courtesies, which must needs bee put into the match of our ordinary trauell: and now let vs sit downe, and see what wee paid for this stocke, and count our winnings: What must our compleat

Traueller stake downe for this goodly furniture o his Gentry? If not losse, danger; danger of the best part, if not all; a double danger; of corruption of religion, and deprauation of manners; both capitall: And can we thinke these endowments so precious, that they should bee worth fetching vpon such an hazard? Will any man (not desperate) runne into an infected house, to rifle for a rich suit? Will any man put his finger into a fiery crucible, to pull out gold? It is wittily taken of Chrysostome, when our Sauiour said, Ne exeat is in eremum; that he sayes not, Goe forth into the desert and see, but beleeue not; but giues an absolute prohibition of going forth at al, that they might be out of the danger of misbeleefe. Tush, idle and melancholicke feares, say some of our Gallants; wherefore serues

discretion, but to seuer good from ill? How asily may a wise man pull a rose, and not pricke his hand? How freely may he dip in this streame, and not be drowned? Little doe these peremptory reoluers know, either the ininuatiue power of euill, or the treachery of their owne heart in receiuing it, or the importunitie of deceiuers in obtruding it: They are the worse for their trauell, and perceiue it not. An egge couered with salt, as our Phlosophers teach vs, hath the mat of it consumed, whiles the shell is whole: many a one receiues poison, and knowes not when hee tooke it. No ma proues extremely euill on the sudden. Through many insensible declinations doe wee all from vertue; and at the first are so gently seazed by vice, that wee cannot beleeue our accusers. It is mischiefe enough, if they can bee

drawne to a lesse dislike of ill; which now by long acquaintance is growne so amiliar to their eyes, that they cannot thinke it so loathsome, as at the first view. The societie of wilfull Idolaters will now downe with them, not without ease; and good meanings beginne to bee allowed for the clokes of grosse superstition. From thence they grow to a fauourable construction of the mis-opinions of the aduerse part, and can complaine of the wrongfull aggrauations of some contentious spirits: and from thence (yet lower) to an indifferent conceit of some more politike positions, and practises o the Romanists. Neither is ther their rest. Hereupon ensues an allowance of some of their dotrines, that are more plausible, and lesse important, and withall a censure of vs that are gone too farre from Rome.

Now the mariage of Ecclesiasticall persons begins to mislike them: the daily and frequent consignation with the crosse is not to no purpose: The retired life of the religious (abandoning the world forsooth) sauours of much mortification; and confession giues no small ease and contentment to the soule. And now by degrees, Poperie beginnes to be no ill religion: If there cannot be a false fire of mis-deuotion kindled in them, it is enough, if they can be cooled in their loue of truth; which how commonly it fals out amongst vs, I had rather experience should speake, then my selfe. Some there are that by a spirituall Antiperistasis haue growne hotter in their zeale, by being encompassed with the outward cold of irreligion, and errour, who as they owe not this grace to themselues, so they are more for wonder

then imitation. If Daniel found a guard in the Lions denne, shall another put himselfe thither for helter? And if Peter walkt vpon the pauement of the water, did the rest of the Disciples step forth and follow him? That valiant champion of Christ (since wee are fallen vpon his name) who durst draw his sword vpon a whole troupe, after all the protestations of his inseparablenesse from his master, was yet infected with the aire of the High-Priests Hall: and whiles hee but warmed himselfe at that fire, cooled in his respect to his Sauiour. Although perhaps this contagion working (as it commonly doth) remissely, causeth not any sudden alteration in our Traueller, but (as wee say of Comets and Eclipses) hath his effect when the cause is forgotten. Neither is there any one more apparant ground of

that luke-warme indifferencie, which is fallen vpon our times, then the ill vse of our wandrings: for our Trauellers being the middle-ranke of men, and therefore either followers of the great, or commanders of the meaner sort, cannot want conuenience of diffusing this temper of ease, vnto both.
         
         
            Sect. 15.
            All this mischiefe is yet hid with a formall profession, so as euery eye cannot finde it: in others it dares boldly breake orth to an open reuolt. How many in our memory, whiles with Dina they haue gone foth to gaze, haue lo their pirituall chastitie, and therewith both the Church, and themselues? How many (like vnto the brooke dron) run from ieruslem through the vale of hospt,
                  bert Pint in his preace to the tstimonies for the rall presence. and end their course in the dead Sea? A popish writer of our Nation

(as himselfe thought) not vnlearned, complaining of the obstinacie of vs heretickes, despaires of preuailing, because hee findes it to be long agoe fore-prophecied of vs in the booke of the Chronicles, At illi Protestantes audire noluerunt.2 Chron. 24. It is well that Protestants were yet heard of in the old Testament, as well as Isuites; whose name, one of their owne by good hap hath
                   
                  n Isam, l. . c.  q. 19. Greter. contra Leeum, c. . & 2. V r ai quida 
                   Iesuta 
                  n scris lris priri. found, Numb 26. 24. Like as Erasmus found Friers in S. Pauls time, inter falsos Fratres. But it were better, if this mans word were as true, as it is idle. Some of ours haue heard to their cost, whose losse ioyned with the griefe of the Church, and dishonour of the Gospell, wee haue sufficiently lamented. How many haue wee knowne strucken with these Asps, which haue died sleping? And in truth, whosoeuer shall consider

this open freedome of the meanes of seducement, must needs wonder that wee haue lost no more; especially if he be acquainted with those two maine helpes of our aduersaries, importunitie and plausibilitie. Neuer any Pharisee was so eager to make a Proselyte, as our late factors of Rome: and if they bee so hot set vpon this seruice, as to compasse sea and land to winne one of vs, shall wee be so madde as to passe both their sea and land, to cast our selues into the mouth of danger? No man setteth foot vpon their coast, which may not presently sing with the Psalmist, They come about mee like Bees. It fares with them as with those which are infected with the pestilence, who (they say) are carried with an itching desire of tainting others. When they haue all done, this they haue gained, that if

Satan were not more busie and vehement then they, they could gaine nothing. But in the meane time there is nothing wherein I wih we would emulate them, but in this heat of diligence, and violnt ambition of winning. Pyrus did not more enie the valour of those old Roman souldiers, which hee read in their wounds, and dead faces, then we doe the buse audacitie of these new. The world could not stand before vs, if our Truth might bee but as hotly followed, as their falshood. Oh that our God, whose cause wee maintaine, would enkindle our hearts with the fire of holy zeale, but so much as Satan hath inflamed theirs with the fire of urie and faction. Oh that hee would shake vs out of this dull ase, and quicken our slacke spirits vnto his owne worke. Arise, O North, and come, O

South, and blow vpon our garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth. These suters will take no deniall, but are ready (as the fashion was to doe with rich matches) to carry away mens soules whether they will or no. Wee see the proofe of their importunitie at home: No bulwarkes of lawes, no barres of iustice (though made of three trees) can keepe our rebanished fugitiues from returning from intermedling. How haue their actions said in the hearing of the world, that since heauen will not heare them, they will tre what hell can doe? And if they dare bee so busie in our owne homes, where they would seeme somewhat awed with the danger of iustice; what (thinke wee) will they not dare to doe in their owne territories, where they haue not free scope only, but assistance, but incouragement?

Neuer generation was so forward as the Iesuiticall, for captation of willes amongst their owne, or of soules amongst strangers. What state is not haunted with these ill spirits? yea what house? yea what soule? Not a Princes CounsellTable, not a Ladies chamber can be free from their shamelesse insinuations. It was not for nothing, that their great Patron Philip the second King of Spaine, called them Clerigos negotiadores; and that Marcus Antonius Columna Generall of the Nauie to Pius quintus, in the battell of Lepanto, and Viceroy of Sicilie, could say to Father Don Alonso, a famous esuite, affecting to be of the counsell of his conscience, Voi altri padri di hsu auete la mente al cielo, le mani al mondo, l' anima al diauolo.
         
         
            Sect. 16.
            Yet were there the lesse perill of their vehemence, if it were onely

rude and boisterous (as in some other sects) that so (as it is in Canonshot) it might be more easily shun'd, then rested: but here, the skill of doing mishiefe contends with the power; their mis-zealous passions hide themselues in a pleasing sweetnesse, and they are more beholden to policie, then strength. What Gentleman of any note can crosse our Seas, whose name is not landed in their bookes before hand, in preuention of his person, whom now arriued, if they finde vntractable through too much preiudice, they labour irst to temper with the plausible conrsation of some smooth Catholike of his owne nation: the name of his Country is warrant enough for his ininuation. Not a word yet may be spoken of religion; as if that were no part of the errand. So haue wee seene an Hake cast off at an

Heron Shaw, to looke and flie a quite other way, and after many carelesse and ouerly fetches, to towre vp vnto the pry intended. There is nothing wherein this faire companion shall not apply himselfe to his welcome Countriman. At last, when hee hath possest himselfe of the heart of his new acquaintance, and got himselfe the reputation of a sweet ingenuitie, and delightfull sociablenesse; hee findes opportunities to bestow some wittie scoffes vpon those parts of our religion, which lie most open to aduantage. And now it is time to inuite him (after other rarities) to see the Monasterie of our English Benedictines, or (if elsewhere) those English Colledges, which the deuout beneficence of our well-meaning neighbours (with no other intention then some couetous farmers lay faltcas

in their doue-cotes) haue bountifully erected. There, it is a wonder if our Traueller meet not with some one, that shall claime kindred or Country of him in a more intire fashion. The societie welcomes him with more then ordinary courtesie: neither can hee refuse (except hee will be vnciuill) to be their guest. He cannot mislike the loue of his Countrimen, hee cannot fault their carriage. And now that they haue mollified the stiffenesse of his preiudice, and with much tempering fitted him for their mold, he is a taske meet for one of their best workmen; who willingly vndertaking it, hath learned to handle him so sweetly, as if he would haue him thinke it a pleasure to bee seduced. Doe yee thinke this Doctor will begin first with the infallibilitie of their great Master, and perswade him that a

Necromancer, an Hereticke, an Atheist, cannot erre in Peters Chaire? or tell him that hee may buy off his sinnes as familiarly as he may buy wares in the market? or teach him that a man may and must both make and eat his God to his breakfast? This hard meat is for stronger mawes. Hee knowes how first to begin with the spoone, and to offer nothing to a weake stomacke, but discourse of easie digestion: As first, that a Caholike so luing and dying (by our confession) may be saued: That there is but one Church, as but one Christ; and that out of this Arke, there is no way but drowning: That this one Church is more likely to bee found in all the world, then in a corner; in all ages, then in the last Century of yeeres; in vnitie, then in diuision. And now comes in the glorious bragge of

the Roman Vniuersalitie, their inviolate Antiquitie, their recorded successions, their harmonious vnitie, their confessed magnificence: That theirs is the mother Church, as to the rest of Christendome, so especially to the English: How well a Monarchie (the best forme of gouernment) beseemes the Church: How vnlikely it is that Christ would leaue his Spouse in the confusion of many heads, or of none. And now, what are wee but a ragge torne from their cote? and where was our religion before Luther lay with Bora? And what miserable subdiuisions are there in our Protestancie? and what a gleaning are we to the haruest of Christendome? wth infinite suggestions of this nature; able (as they are plausibly vrgd) to shake an vngrounded iudgement: which i they haue so farre preuailed, as that

the hearer will abide himselfe hood-winkt with this vaile of the Church, how easily shall time lead him into those hatefuller absardities?
         
         
            Sect. 17.
            In all which proceedings, these impostors haue a double aduantage: First, that they deliuer the opinion of their Church with such mitigation and fauour, as those that care to please, not to enforme: forming the voyce of the Church to the liking of the hearer, not the iudgment of the hearer to the voyce of the Church: wherein it is not hard to obserue, that Popery spoken and written are two things; In discourse, nothing is more ordinary then to disclaime some of their receiued positions, to blanch others. It is the malice of an aduersary that mis-reports them; they doe not hold that images should bee adored; that the

wood of the crosse should be worshipped with the very same deuotion that is due to Christ himselfe; that the Church is the Iudge of Gods writings; that Panl the fift cannot erre; that a man may merit of his maker, much lesse supererogate; that a mouse may runne away with that which either is, or was God Almighty; That it is lawfull to kill an hereticall King, and all other those monsters of opinion, which their most classicke Authors haue both hatched and shamelesly thrust into the light of the world. They defie those ridiculous Legends which we father vpon their Church; and how much doe they scorne S. Francis his Bird, or his Wolfe, or his Wounds, or his Apostles of Assise. Pope Ioane was but a fancy: Neuer Pope was an hereticke. If now wee cry out of impudence, and call their allowed

writers to witnesse. Lo, euen they also are forged by vs, & are taught to play booty on our side. Thus resolued to out-face all euidence, they make faire weather of their fowlest opinions, and inueigh against nothing so much as the spightfulnesse of our slanders. It is not possible that any wise stranger should be in loue with the face of their Church, if he might see her in her owne likenesse, and therfore they haue cunningly masked one part of it, and painted another, so as those features of hers which are vgly and offensiue, shall not appeare to any but her owne eyes. And because bookes are dangerous blabs, and will be telling the generations to come, how strangely that face is altered with Age and Art, therefore their tongues are clipped also, and made to speake none but her owne words. Out of

this licence, and hope to winne, they can fit their dishes to eueryExemplar. Epist. Scriptae ad Dminum Paulinum quondam datarium sub Ciementis 8 beat mmori Ponticat. palate, and are so sawcy, as to make the Church belye it selfe. Hence it was that a Spanish Father could teach, that it is not of the necessity of faith, to beleeue that the present Pope is the Vicar of Christ, and the Successor of Peter. That Hostius the esuite could say, that the Pope abused his keyes, and the authorityIbid. of the Church, in receiuing Henry the fourth. That another of his fellowes in a discourse with a French Bishop, could disparage the decision of his Holines in comparison of a generall Counsel. That Mens the reader of diuinity at Valledolid followingIbid. Salas the Iesuite, could affirme the lawfulnes of the mariage of religious persons vpon a doubtful reuelation. That more then one of that order, haue dared to broach confession by letters, against the

of Clement Bull the 8. And if these men be no sparing of their contradictions to that Vice-god of theirs, whose vassals they are by peculiar profession, how much more boldly will they swim against the streame of any common opinion, that may concerne the body of that head?
         
         
            Sect. 18.
            Their second aduantage is, that they regard not with what vntruths they make good thir owne assertions; It is all one with what morter or rubbish they build vp a side. From hence flow the confifident reports, both of their miracles to conuince vs, and their slanders to disgrace vs. Father Hayndius, a Iesuite of 33. yeeres standing, amongst fifty two complaints, which (out of an honest remorse) he put vp against his owne society, to their Generall Aquauiua, findes this not the least, that his fellowes samed not to seeke the honour

of their order, by cogging of miracles. What packets flie about daily of their Indian wonders? Euen Card. Bellarmine can abide to come in as an auoucher of these couzenages; who dares auerre that his fellow Xauier had not only healed the deafe, dumb and blinde, but raised the dead; Whiles his brother Acosta after many yeeres spent in those parts can pull him by the sleeue, and tell him in his eare, so lowd that all the world may heare him, Prodigia nulla producimus,Lib. 4. de salut. Ind. c. 12. &c. neque ver?? est opus. Of the same stamp are the daily-renued miracles, reuelations, viions, wherewith any mans eares must needes bee beaten amongst them: Africke was at the best but barren of nouelties, in comparison of Rome; and yet the world is incredulous, if it will not suffer it selfe gulled with these holy frauds. And

no fewer are those lewd calumniations (the stuffe of all their inuectiues) whereby they labour to make vs loathsome to the world: our persons, our doctrines are loaded with reproaches; neither matters it how iust they are, but how spightfull; What other measure can be expected of vs, when their best friends haue thus (vpon some priuate dislikes) smarted from them. Their owne holy Fathers, Clement the eight, and Sixtus quintus, and with them (the honour of the Iesuiticall order) Cardinall Tollet, can all shew bloudy wales in their backes, from their lashes. Their late Patron of famous memory, whose heart they well-merited, and keep it (as their deere relique) enshrined in their La-Flesche, was after his death in their pulpits proclaimed Tyran and worse: noExamplar. pit. supr. cit. maruell then if after the virulent

declamations of our Gifford (their Gabriel) and the malicious suggestions of others of that viperous brood, we haue much adoe to perswade our neighbors, that we haue any Churcs, Baptisme, Liturgy, Religion. I appeale then to all eyes and eares, how easie it is for a man that will take leaue to himselfe, of making what truth he lists, and defending them by what vutruths he pleaseth, to lead a credulous heat whither he pleaseth.
         
         
            Sect. 19.
            But if the power of falsified reason preuaile not, these desperate factors of Rome (as I haue beene informed) haue learned out of their acquaintance in the Court of the Prince of darknesse, to imploy stronger aid. On some of their hands, I feare, Magicall delusions and deuillish incantations shall not want, rather then they will want a client. Neither can this feeme

strange to any, that knowes how familiarly the Roman Church professes the solemne practise of coniuration; in such a fashion, as it doth more then trouble the best Casuists, to set downe a perfect difference betwixt their sacred Magicke, & the Diabolicall. From hence perhaps haue proceeded those miraculous apparitions (if at least they were any other but fancie, or fraud) wherewith some of our death-sicke Gentlemen amongst them, haue beene frighted into Catholikes. A famous Diuine of France, second to none for learning, or fidelitie, told me this one amongst other instances, of his owne experience, which hee yet liues to iustifie: A Gentleman of the religion, whose wife was popishly deuoted, lying vpon the bed of his sicknesse, in expectation of death, sends for this Diuine, his

Pastor; the sicke mans wife sends for a Iesuite; both meet at the beds side; each perswades him to his owne part; both pleade for their religion at this barre, before these Iudges: after two houres disputation, not only the Gentleman was cheerefully confirmed in that iudgement which hee had embraced, but his wife also, out of the euidence of truth, began to incline to him, and it: The Iesuite departed discontent; yet within some few houres after, returning (when the coast was clearer) intreats some priuate conference with the Gentlewoman; with whom walking in her garden, hee did vehemently expostulate, mixing therewithall his strongest perswaons; at last to shut vp his discourse, he importun'd her with many obsecrations, that she would vouhsafe to receiue from his hands a little boxe

which he there offred her, and for his sake weare it about her continually: shee condescended. No sooner had shee taken it, then shee fell to so great a detestation of her husband, that shee could by no meanes bee drawne into his presence, and within two dayes ater, in this estate shee died. An act more worthy the sword of iustice, then the penne of an aduersarie. These courses are as secret as wicked: not daring therefore peremptorily to accuse, I had rather leaue these practises to further inquirie. Sure I am that by their tongues Satan labours to inchant the world, and hath strongly deluded too many soules. And are wee weary of ours, that wee dare tempt God, and offer our selues as challengers to this spirituall danger? The Iesuites, amongst much change of houses, haue two famous

for the accordance of their names; one called The Bow, at Nola; the other The Arrow, (La Flesche) in France: though this latter were more worthy of the name of a whole Quiuer, containing not fewer then eight hundred shafts of all sizes. Their Apostate Ferrier (if I shall not honour him too much) plaid vpon them in this distich:
            
               Arcum Nola dedit, dedit ill is alma Sagittam
               Gallia; quis funem, quem meruere, dabit?
               Nola the Bow, and France the shaft did bring:
               But who shall helpe them to an hempen string?
            
            This prouision is for the care of Christian Prouinces: but in the meane time, what madnesse is it in vs, not only to giue aime to these rouing flights, but to offer our selues to bee their standing Butt,

that they may take their full aime and hit vs leuell at pleasure. Doe wee not heare some of their owneAt etiam nu non animaduertimus quod Lati sermonis obn impurissim?? Gallici inuentutis mores ingenuos foedant, bonarum literarum praetet pessimas edocent artes, dum ingenia excolunt, animas perdunt, &c. Oratio ad Curiam Parlamenti super Henrici magni parricidali nce. fellow-Catholikes in the midst of their awfullest Senate, the Parliament of Paris, pleading vehemently against these factious spirits, and crying out passionately of that danger (which will follow vpon their admission) hoth of lewd manners, and false doctrine, and doe we in greater opposition feare neither? and especially from English Iesuites? Some Countries yeeld more venomous vipers then others; ours the worst. I would it were not too easie to obserue, that as our English Papists are commonly more Iesuitish, so our English Iesuites are more furious, then their fellowes. Euen those of the hottest climates cannot match them in fiery dispositions. And doe we put our selues out of our

comfortable sunne-shine, into the midst of the flame of these noted incendiaries? Doe wee take pleasure to make thm rich with the spoile of our soules, and because they will not come fast enough to fetch these booies, doe we ge to carry them vnto their pillage?
         
         
            Sect. 20.
            The danger is in the men more then in their cause; and if this great Curtizan of the world had not so cunning Pandars, I should wonder how shee should get any but foolish customers. Th searcher of all hearts (before whose Tribunall I shal once come to giue an account of this Censure) knowes I speake it not maliciously; Him I call to witnesse that I could not find any true life of Religion amongst those that would bee Catholikes. I meddle not with the errours of Speculations, or Schole-points; wherein their iudgement palpably offendeth,

I speake of the liuely practise of Piety; What haue they amongst them but a very out-side of Christianity, a meere formality of deuotion; Looke into their Churches; there their poore ignorant Laity hope to present their best seruices to God; and yet alas they say they know not what, they heare they know not what, they doe they they know not what; returning empty of all hearty edification, and onely full of confused intentions; and are taught to thinke this sacrifice of fooles meritorious. Looke vpon their Chemarim the sacred actors in this religious scene, what shall you see but idle apishnesse in their solemnest worke, and either mockery, or slubbering? Looke into their religious houses; what shall you see but a trade of careles and lazie holinesse; houres obserued, because they must, not because

they would. What doe they but lull piety a sleepe with their heartlesse and sleepy Vespers? Look into the priuate closets of their deuout Ignorants, what difference shall you see betwixt the Image and the Suppliant? If they can heare their beades knacke vpon each other, they are not bid to care for hearing their prayers reflect vpon heauen: Shortly in all that belongs to God, the worke done sufficeth, yea meriteth; and what neede the heart bee wrought vpon for a taske of the hand? Looke into the melancholike cels of some austere Recluses; there you may finde perhaps an hairecloth, or a a whip, or an heardle; but shew me true mortification, the power of spirituall renouation of the soule? How should that bee found there when as that sauing faith (which is the onely purger of the heart) is

barred out as presumptuous: and no guest of that kinde allowed, but the same which is common to Diuels. What Papist in all Chistendome hath euer beene heard to pray daily with his family; or to sing, but a Psalme at home? Looke into the vniuersall course of the Catholike life; there shall you find te Decalogue professedly broken, Besides the ordinary practise of Idolatry; and frequence of oathes; Who euer saw Gods day duely kept in any city, village, houshold vnder the iurisdiction of Rom? Euery obscure Holy-day takes the wall of it, and thrusts it into the channell. Who sees not obedience to authority so sleighted, that it stands onely to the mercy of humane dispensation; and in the rest of Gods Lawes, who sees not how fowle sinnes passe for veniall? and how easily veniall sinnes passe their

satisfaction: for which, a crosse, or a drop of holy-water is sufficient amends. Who sees not how no place can bee left for truth, where there is full roome giuen to equiuocation. All this, though it bee harsh to the conscionable man, yet is no lesse pleasing to the carnall. The way of outward fashionablenesse in religion, and inward libertie of heart cannot but seeme faire to nature; and especially when it hath so powerfull angariation. It is a wonder if but one halfe of Christendome bee thus won to walke in it. Those which are either vngrounded in the principles of Religion, or the vnconscionable in the practise, are fit to trauell into thee miserable errours, But though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah sinne. Come yee not to Gilgal; neither goe yee vp to Bethauen.
         
         
            Sect. 21.
            From the danger of corruption


iudgement. Let vs turne our eyes to the deprauation of manners; which not seldome goes before: Apples therefore fall from the tree because they are worme-eaten, they are not worme-eaten because they fall; and, as vsually followes, Satan like the rauen first seizes vpon the eye of vnderstanding, and then preyes freely vpon the other carcase. Wee may be bad enough at home, certainly wee are the worse for our neighbours. Old Rome was not more iealous of the Grecian and African manners, then wee haue reason to be of the Roman. It were well if wee knew our owne fashions, better if wee could keepe them. What mischiefe haue wee amongst vs that we haue not borrowed? To begin at our skinne; who knowes not whence wee had the varietie of our vaine disguises? As if wee had not wit

enough to bee foolish, vnlesse wee were taught it. These dresses being constant in their mutabilitie, shew vs our masters. What is it that wee haue not learned of our neighbours, saue only to be proud good cheape? Whom would it not vexe to see how that other sexe hath learned to make Antiks and monsters of themselues? Whence came their hips to the shoulders, and their breasts to the nauell; but the one from some ill-shap't Dames of France, the other from the worse minded Curtizans of Italie? Whence else learned they to daube these mudde-walles with Apothecaries morter; and those high washes, which are so cunningly lickt on, that the wet napkin of Phryne should be deceiued? Whence the frisled and poudred bushes of their borrowed excrements? as if they were ashamed of

the head of Gods making, and proud of the Tire-womans? Where learned wee that deuillish Art and practise of duell, wherein men seeke honour in bloud, and are taught the ambition of being glorious butchers of men? Where had we that luxurious delicacie in our feasts, in which the nose is no lesse pleased, then the palate; and the eye no lesse then either? wherein the piles of dishes make barricades against the appetite, and with a pleasing encombrance trouble an hungry guest? Where those formes of ceremonious quaffing, in which men haue learned to make Gods of others, and beasts of themselues; and lose their reason whiles they pretend to doe reason? Where the lawlesnesse (mis-called freedome) of a wilde tongue, that runs, with reynes in the necke, through the

bed-chambers of Princes, their closets, their Counsell-Tables, and spares not the very cabinet of their breasts, much lesse can bee barr'd out of the most retired secrecie of inferiour greatnesse? Where the change of noble attendance, and hospitalitie, into foure wheeles, and some few butterflies? Where the Art of dishonestie in practicall Machiauelisme, in false equiuocations? Where the slight account of that filthinesse, which is but condemned as veniall, and tolerated as not vnnecessary? Where the skill of ciuill and honorable hypocrisie, in those formall complements, which doe neither expect beleefe from others, nor carry any from our selues? Where that vnnaturall villanie, which though it were burnt with fire and brimstone from heauen, and the ashes of it drowned in the dead

sea, yet hath made shift to reuine, and cals for new vengeance vpon the actors? Where that close Atheisme, which secretly laughes God in the face, and thinkes it weaknesse to beleeue, wisdome to professe any religion? Where the bloudy and tragicall science of King-killing; the new diuinitie of disobedience and rebellion; with too many other euils, wherewith forraine conuersation hath indangered the infection of our peace. Loe here, deare Countrimen, the fruit of your idle gaddings: Better perhaps might bee had; but hee was neuer acquainted at home, that knowes not our nature to bee like vnto fire, which if there bee any infection in the roome, drawes it straight to it selfe: Or like vnto et, which omitting all precious obiects, gathers vp strawes and dust. Ilanders haue beene euer in

an ill name. Wherefore? saue only for the confluence of forrainers, which neuer come without the fraight of their nationall wickednesse. The experience whereof, hath moued some witty nations, both ancient and present, to shut themselues vp within their owne bounds, and to barre the entercourse of strangers, as those that thought best to content themselues with their owne faults. A corrupt disposition, out of a naturall fertilitie, can both beget and conceiue euill alone; but if it bee seconded by examples, by precepts, by incouragements, the Ocean it selfe hath not so much spawne, as it: In all which regards, he hath escaped well, that returnes but what hee carried; but hee is worthy of memorie, that returnes either more good, or lesse euill. Some haue come home perhaps


more sparing, others more suttle, others more outwardly courteous, others more capricious, some more tongue-free, few euer better. And if themselues bee not sensible of their alterations, yet their Country and the Church of God feeles and rues them.
         
         
            Sect. 22.
            Let mee therefre haue leaue to close this discourse with a double sute, one to our Gentry; the other to supream authority; both which shall come from the bottome of an heart vnfainedly sacrificed to the common good; neither speak I words, but my very soule vnto both. To the former my suit is, that they would bee happy at home: God hath giuen vs a world of our owne, wherein there is nothing wanting to earthly contentment. Whither goe yee then, worthy Country-men, or what feeke yee? Heere growes that

wealth, which yee go but to spend abroad; Heere is that sweet peace which the rest of the world admires and enuies: Heere is that gracious and well-tempered gouernment, which no nation vnder heauen may dare once offer to parallell: Here all liberall Arts raigne and triumph: And for pleasure, either our earth, or our sea yeelds vs all those dainties, which their natiue Regions enioy but single. Lastly, heere Heauen stands open, which to many other parts is barred on the out-side with ignorance or mis-beleefe. And shall our wantonnes contemn all this bounty of God, & carry vs to seek that, which we shall find no where but behind vs, but within vs? Shall the affectation of some friuolous toyes draw vs away from the fruition of those solid comforts, which are offred vs within our owne doores? How

many of ours, whom their iust offence hath cast out of the bosome of their country, compare their exile with death, and can scarce abide to bid that breath welcome, which they are forced to draw in a forraine aire; and though freedome of conscience entertaine them neuer so liberally abroad, yet resolue either to liue or die at home; and doe wee suffer our folly to banish vs from those contentments, which they are glad to redeeme with the hazard of their blood? Are we so little in our owne books that wee can bee content to purchase out-landish supersuities with the mis-carriage of our soules, with the danger of mis-carriage, with the likely-hood of danger? Are we so foolish, that whiles we may sweetely enjoy the settled estate of our Primogeniture, wee will needes bring vpon our selues

the curse of Reuben, to run abroad like water; whose quality it is, not eaily to be kept within the proper bounds? yea the curse of Cain, to put our selues from the ide of Eden into the Land of Nod, that is, of demigration? None of the least imprecations, which Dauid makes against Gods enemies, is, Make them vnto like a wheele, o Lord: Motion is euer accompanied with vnquietnesse; and both argues, and causes imperfection, whereas the happy estate of heauen is described by rest; whose glorious spheres in the meane time, doe so perpeually moue, that they are neuer remoued from their places. It is not the least part either of wisdome, or happinesse, to know when wee are well. Shall we not be shamelesly vnthankfull, if we cannot sing the note of that great Chorister of God, My lot is fallen to mee in a good

ground? Hath not the munificence of God made this Iland as it were an abridgement of his whole earth, in which he hath contriued (though in a lesser letter) all the maine and materiall commodities of the greater world, and doe wee make a prison where God meant a Paradise? Enioy therefore (happy Countrimen) enioy freely God and your selues; enrich your selues with your owne mins, improue those blessed opportunities which God hath giuen you, to your mutuall aduantage; and care not to be like any but your selues.
         
         
            Sect. 23.
            And if at any time these vnworthy papers may fall betwixt the hands of my Soueraigne Master, or any of his graue and honorable ministers of State, let the meanenesse of so weake and obscure solicitors presume to commend this matter to their deepest consideration;

               
               
               
               
and out of an honest zeale of the common safetie, sue to them for a more strict restraint of that dangerous libertie, whereof too many are bold to carue themselues. Who can bee ignorant of those wise and wholesome lawes, which are enacted already to this purpose? or of those carefull and iust cautions, wherewith the licences of Trauell are euer limited? But what are wee the better for Gods owne lawes, without execution? Or what are limits vnto the lawlesse? Good lawes are the hedges of the Common-wealth: iust dispensations are as gates, or stiles in the hedge. If euery stragler may at pleasure cast open a gap in this fence of the State, what are we the better for this quickset, then if wee lay open to the common? Who sees not how familiarly our young Recusants, immediately

vpon their disclosing, are sent ouer for their full hatching and making? Italie, Spaine, Artois, and now of late France it selfe, prouides nests, and perches, and mewes for these birds, with the same confidence, wherewith wee breede our owne at home; which, when they are once well acquainted with the Roman lure, are sent backe againe, fit for the prey. And as for those of our owne feather: whereas the libertie of their Trauell is bounded chiefly with this double charge; one, that they haue no conuersation or conference with Iesuites, or other dangerous persons; the other, that they passe not into the dominions of the Kings enemies; both these are so ommonly neglected, as if they were intended only for a verball formalitie, yea as if the prohibition meant to teach men what they should doe.

Euery of our nouices hath learned to make no difference of men; and dare breathe in the poisonous aire of Italie it selfe, and touch the very pommell of the chaire of pestilence. It is this licentious freedome (which wee mis-call open-hearted ingenuitie) that vndoes vs. Doe wee not see the wary closenesse of our Aduersaries, which will not so much as abide one of our books (a mute solicitor) to harbour in any of their coasts? How many of the Italian or Spanish Noblesse haue wee knowne allowed to venture their education in our Courts or Vniuersities? Doe they lie thus at the locke, and doe wee open our breast, and display our armes, and bid an enemie strike vs where hee list? Since then wee haue no more wit, or care, then o bee willingly guiltie of our owne shame, oh that the hands of supreme authoritie

would be pleased to locke vs within our owne doores, and to keepe the keyes at their owne girdle. And (to speake truth) to what purpose are those strait and capitall inhibitions of the returne of our factious fugitiues into ths Kingdome, if whiles the wicket is shut vpon them, that they should not come to vs, the posterne be open to vs, that we may goe to them? As all intercourse is perillous, so that is most, which is by our owne prouocation. Here yet they dare but lurke in secret, and take only some sudden snatches at a weake prey, like vnto euening-wolues, that neuer walke forth but vnder the cloake of the night; but in their owne territories, they can shew the sunne their spoiles, and thinke this act worthy of garlands and trophees. Here we haue mastiues to secure our flockes: there the

prey goes stragling alone to the mouth of their dennes, without protection, without assistance, and offers to be deuoured. Ye whom the choice of God hath made the great Shepheards of his people, whose charge it is to feed them by gouernment, suffer not their simplicitie to betray their liues vnto the fangs of these cruell beasts; but chase them home rather, from the wilfull search of their owne perdition, and shut them vp together in your strong and spacious folds, that they may be at once safe, and yee glorious.
         
         
            Sect. 24.
            Lastly, for those, whom necessary occasions draw forth of their owne coasts (that wee may haue done with those, which like foolish Papists goe on pilgrimage to see another blocke better dressed then that at home) let mee say to them, as Simeon that propheticall

Monke said to the pillers which hee whipped before the Earth-quake, Stand fast, for yee shall be shaken. And therefore, as the Crane, when shee is to flie against an high winde, doth ballace her selfe with stones in her bill, that shee may cut the aire with more steddinesse; so let them carefully fore-instruct, and poise themselues with the sound knowledge of the principles of religion, that they may not bee carried about with euery winde of doctrine. Whereto if they adde but those lessons, which they are taught by the State, in their letters of passage, there may be hope, they shall bring backe the same soules they carried. It was at least an inclination to a fall, that Eue tooke boldnesse to hold chat with the Serpent. And as subtill Lawyers desire no more aduantage in the

quarrell, which they would picke at conueyances, then many words, so neither doe our Aduersaries. Whiles our eares are open, and our tongues free, they will hope well of our very denials. Errour is cratie, and out of the power of his Rhetoricall insinuations, ofttimes carries away probabilitie from truth. I remember in that famous Embassie of the three Philosophers, which Athens sent to Rome, Critolaus, Diogenes, and Carneades, there falling out many occasions of discourse, wise Cato perswaded the Senate to a speedie dismission of those (otherwise welcome) guests; because (said hee) whiles Carneades disputes, scarce any man can dicerne which is the truth. There is more danger of these spirituall Sophisters, by how much the businesse is more important, and their subtiltie greater. Let

our passenger therefore (as that wise Grecian serued his fellowes) stop vp his eares with waxe against these Syrens. Our Sauiour would not giue Satan audience euen whiles hee spake true; because hee knew that truth was but to countenance errour. There is euer true corne strowed vnder a pit-fall: those cares are full and weightie, which wee dresse with lime to deceiue the poore birds in a snow. No fisher lets downe an emptie hooke, but clothed with a proper and pleasing bait. These impostors haue no other errand, but deceit. If he loue himselfe, let him bee afraid of their fauours, and thinke their frownes safer then their smiles. And if at any time (as no flie is more importunate) they thrust themselues into his conuersation, let him (as those which must necessarily passe by a carrion

in the way) hold his breath, and hasten to be out of their aire. And if they yet follow him in his flight, let him turne backe to them with the Angels farewell, Increpet te Dominus.
            FINIS.
         
         
      
   
