<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         
         ALGIERS VOYAGE IN A IOVRNALL OR BRIEFE Reportary of all occurrents hapning in the fleet of ships sent out by the King his most excellent Maiestie, as well against the Pirates of Algiers, as others: the whole body of the Fleete consisting of 18. Sayle.
         VIZ.

               Sixe of his Maiesties Ships.
               Ten Marchants Ships.
               Two Pinnaces.
            
         
         Vnder the command of Sir Robert Mansel knight, Vice-Admirall of England, and Admirall of that Fleet: and a Councell of Warre appointed by his Maiestie.
         The Accidents of euery particular Moneth (since the first setting forth) being in this discouery, expressed by one that went along in the Voyage.
         Imprinted MDCXXI.
      
      
         
         
         TO THE READER.
         
            READER,
         
         THou shalt here receiue a faithfull report (by way of a Iournall) of all such occurrents as fell out in the Voyage to Algiers. Those onely that were remarkeable are in this short discourse to be found, the slight ones are not worth, nor worthy of any publicatiō. Dissigns of this nature managed by the directions of so many noble Gentlemen, a number of valiant Captains and well experienced Nauigators, seconding the courages of the other, do for the most part fill the itching eares of the world, with more then a common expectation of strange things to bee done, beyond the possibility of man. But if he that is so curious in his inquisition, had beene but a personall aduenturer in some of the dangers which wee ran through, I make no doubt but hee would confesse hee had

seene enough, and vndergone more then willingly hee could wish himselfe to bee acquainted with againe. How our ships were furnished for men or munition; what seuerall Captaines and Commanders were in euery one of them are heere truly set downe: the burthen also of euery ship, then the dayes and months are named in which any memorable act was performed, the townes likewise within in the Straights of Gibraltar, before which our men of Warre did any seruice.
         And to make this Discourse the more pleasing to thee, such Spanish ships and gallyes, besides Turkish Pirates, as we encountred with at Sea, shall appeare sayling, in all their gallantry before thee. Imagine (as thou readest) that thou hearest the Canon playing, and Turkes by hundreds tumbling into the Seas, our owne stretching out hands to saue a miserable number of poore Christians made slaues to the barbarous Turke & crafty Moore, but deliuered from that seruitude by vs, God assisting our labours.
         
            Such men of quality as either dyed or miscarryed in this Voyage, haue here the names written downe.
         But least the citing of particulars in this place, should alter the property of an Epistle, which (like the first day of a Terme amongst Lawyers) should be spent onely in complement, and bidding thee welcome to this feast of newes▪ I will no longer detayne thine eye from longing for that, which my paines and obseruation haue diligently collected to giue thee content, which if here thou findest, it shall be to me some part of a recompence, for those stormy dayes and nights in which I haue beene in the voyage. So farewell.
      
      
         
         
         The Authour to his Boooke.
         ANd sith thou art not limb'd with trees nor flowers
         Of Eloquence, but clad in white and blacke;
         Thou must prepare thy selfe t'abide the showers,
         Of them that of dislike occasion take,
         And when thou likeliest art to go to wracke,
         Seeme not against them thine error to defend;
         But rather yeeld a little and giue backe,
         And pray them, that they will thy faults amend.
      
      
         The Preface to the Reader.
         
            MY true subiect tending to entreate
            Of new don warres, and acts of chiualry,
            Whereby renowned Captaines much honour get:
            And with eternall praises now
            (Their names and fames) is forced to require
            Thee mighty Mars with art him to inspire.
         
         
            Whose fiery nature bent to wrath and thrall,
            As being of complexion hot and drie,
            Melancholicke, and furious with all,
            (For in thy bones choller hid doth lie)
            Which rightly cause all Poets sound thy fame,
            And thee the God of warres in stories name.
         
         
            Sith then thou art of warlicke influence,
            And that my stile of battaile must indite:
            
               Assist me with some marshall eloquence,
            That I may frame my hand and pen aright.
            With words of art and artificiall phrase,
            Of valiant men to speake th'eternall praise.
         
         
            And if at my request thou daignest to list
            Or grant the thing which I of thee do craue,
            Yet for her sake that louingly thee kist,
            (Blacke Vulcans wife) and further fauour gaue;
            Vouchsafe thy ayde my lines so to infuse,
            That I therein fit tearmes and phrase may vse.
         
         
            Else truth to say so barren is my wit,
            And voyd of aureat liquord eloquence.
            That I confesse my selfe to be vnfit,
            Or able to accomplish my pretence.
            But praying all that sect, with heart and mind,
            Not spare to speake, if any fault they find.
         
         
            And with good will I shall amend the same,
            (For many eyes may see much more then one.)
            Correct then freely where you find the blame,
            But find not fault whereas deserueth none,
            And so in hope I shall your fauours win,
            With your support this story Ile begin.
         
         
            Yours or not his owne I. B.
         
      
   
   
      
         
         THE NAMES OF THE COVNCEL of Warre.
         
            SIr Robert Mauncell Knight.
            Sir Richard Hawkins Knight.
            Sir Thomas Button Knight.
            Sir Henry Palmer Knight.
            Captaine Arthur Manwaring Esquire.
            Captaine Thomas Loue Esquire.
            Captaine Samuell Argall Esquire.
            Edward Clarke Esquire, and Secretary to the Councell of Warre.
         
         
            The names of the Captaines, the Ships, their burdens, number of men and Ordnance in his Maiesties sixe Ships.
            1 SIr Robert Mauncell Admirall in the Lyon, burden 600. Tuns, men 250. peeces of brasse Ordnance 40.
            2 Sir Richard Hawkins Vice Admirall in the Vantguard, burden 660. tuns, men 250. Brasse Ordnance 40.
            3 Sir Thomas Button Rere Admirall in the Rainbow, burden 660. tuns, men 250. Brasse Ordnance 40.
            
               4 Captaine Arthur Manwaring in the Constant reformation, burden 660. tuns, men 250. Brasse Ordnance 40.
            5 Sir Henry Palmer in the Anthelope, burden 400. tun men 160. Brasse Ordnance 34.
            6 Captaine Thomas Loue in the Conuertine, burden 500. tun, men 220. Brasse Ordnance 36.
         
         
            In the Marchants Ships.
            1 CAptaine Samuel Argall in the Golden Phenix, burden 300. tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 24
            2 Captain Christopher Harries in the Samuel, burden 300. tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 22.
            3 Sir Iohn Fearne in the Mary gold, burden 260 tun, men 100. Iron Ordnance 21.
            4 Captaine Iohn Penington in the Zouch Phenix, burden 280 tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 26.
            5 Captaine Thomas Porter in the Barbery, burden 200. tuns, men 80. Iron Ordnance 18.
            6 Sir Francis Tanfield in the Centurion, burden 200. tun, men 100. Iron ordnance 22,
            7 Sir Iohn Hamden in the Primro, burden 180. tuns, men 80. Iron Ordnance 18.
            8 Captain Eusabey Caue in the Hercules, burden 300. tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 24.
            9 Captaine Robert Haughton in the Neptune, burden 280 tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 21.
            10 Captaine Iohn Chidley in the Marchant Bonauenture, burden 260. tuns, men 110. Iron Ordnance 23.
            11 Captaine George Raymonnd in the Restoure, burden 130. tuns, men 50. Iron Ordnance 12.
            
               12 Captaine Thomas Harbert in the Marmaduke, burden 100. tuns, men 50. Iron Ordnance 12.
         
         The Fleet thus furnished set saile in the sound of Plimmouth the 12. of October in the morning, in the yeare 1620. the wind being variable we turned and towed into the Channell, the weather being very faire in the euening wee steered along the Shore.
         
            October.
            THe 12. at noone wee had the Lizard West, North West 4. leagues off, this day and the next night we had little winde.
            The 13. at noone hauing a fresh gale at North, North West, wee making a South West way, the Lizard at noone bare North West and by North some 15. Leagues, the wind continuing as before we steered away South West and by South.
            The 17, in the morning wee made Cape finister bearing of vs East, South East some 13. leagues of.
            The 24. we had sight of the Burlings in the morning, the bearing of vs South, South East 5. leagues the wind being then at South and by West, wee stood of West and by South, hauing much winde and raine.
            The 28. we had sight of Mountchego, the body of it bearing East.
            The 29. we fell with the Cape of Spaine, and haling neere the shore saluted the Castle with our Ordnance, and they vs: here our Admirall sent a shore to enquire for letters of aduice which he exspected, but found none: at night wee set saile the winde being at North, North West, and the 30. at

night we entred the straights.
            The 31. in the morning we turned into the roade of Gibralter, where were riding at anchor two of the king of Spaines ships of warre, the Vice-Admirall of a squadron with the kings armes in his fore-top and another, who so soone as they perceiued vs weighed their Anchors, set saile, & comming Leeward of our Admirall, strooke his flag, saluting him with there smal shot & great Ordnance, after haled him with voyces; our Admirall striking his flag, answered them with voyces, gaue them his orduce and small shot, all the fleete following in order: this done, wee saluted the towne with our Ordnance, the towne doing the like by answering vs. Our Admiral being at an Anchor, the Spanish Captaine accompanied with other Gentlemen, came aboord our Admirall, who tould vs that there were great store of Pirates abroade, and that two of the Pirats ships had fought with seuen Spanish Gallyes, and had slaine them 400. men, and that they had beene at Steria a small towne with thirty sayle of ships and ten gallyes, and had taken it, and carryed away diuers prisoners, and that they had threatned to take Gibraltar; there the Admirall sent his sicke men a shore, hauing houses and lodgings prouiuided for them, amongst whom was Captaine Iohn Fenner who here dyed.
         
         
            Nouember.
            NOuember the second about seuen in the morning hauing a fresh gale at North West, the

Admirall with the rest of the fleet weighed Anchor and standing off, met North the reare Admirall of the Spanish fleete, who saluting vs North his Ordnance and we stood on our course North East and by East, being bound for Malhaga.
            The third about two in the morning wee came to an Anchor in Malhaga roade, and about eight of the clocke wee saluted the towne with our Ordnance and diuers volleyes of small shot; here diuers Spaniards of account came aboord our ships whom we kindly entertained, here we likewise exspected letters but hard not of any.
            The sixth our Admirall dispatched a Gentleman one Maister Iohn Duppa with letters to the English Embassador at the Court of Spain, to let him know of our arriuall and proceedings. This day about 11 of the clocke, the fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle the winde at North West. But before wee weighed, our Admirall gaue order to the fleete to diuide themselues into three squadrons, the Admirall squadron was kept sixe leagues from the shore, with pendants in the maine toppes for their signes; the Vice-Admirals squadron three leagues without him, on his bowe with pendants on his foretops; the Reare-Admirall three leagues within him on his quarter with pendants on their Mysen tops, who deuiding themselues according to their order steered away East and by South alongst the shore, being bound for Allicant.
            The seuenth, about sixe in the morning it being calme, and all the fleete together, the Admirall tooke in all her sayles and lay a hull, all the fleete

doing the like, the Admirall put out his flag of generall Councell which was Saint George. Wherupon all the Captaines and Maisters repayred aboord him, where it was concluded, and thought meet that two ships of least draught of water, and one Pinnace should hale the shore close aboord to see if any Pirates were at an Anchor, either in Bayes or Coues, and to free the shore; here likewise was giuen a word whereby to know our owne fleet from others, if any strangers should chance to fall amongst vs in the night, the word was Greenwich Tower. The Councell ended, and euery man repaired aboord his owne ship, in the euening the whole fleet in their order sayled alongst towards Cap Degat.
            The eight and ninth daies hauing but little wind we gained not much way.
            The tenth in the morning falling with the point of Muttrill, and hauing the winde Southerly, the whole fleete put into the roade and there Anchored.
            The 13. about ten in the morning our Admirall shot of a warning peece, that all such that were of the fleete might repaire aboord, and about foure in the afternoone hauing afaire gale at west, set sayle and steered away East and by South.
            Th 14. at nine in the morning wee were thwart of Cap Degatt, the winde continuing Westerly wee shaped our course North East and by East alongst the shore.
            The 19. in the morning wee came to Anchor in Allicant roade, where the whole fleete saluted the

towne with their Ordnance, and the towne vs: here our Admirall hauing prouided houses for his sicke men, as before he had done at Gibraltar, sent 37. sicke men of his owne ships company a shore, here likewise he dispatched a Gentleman one Master Walter Long to Carthagena with letters of aduice, but all this while could receiue no such letters as we expected.
            The 25. being fitted with Wine, Water, and other such necessaryes as we wanted, the winde being Northerly, the whole fleet set saile, leauing behind the Good Will out of whom our Admirall had taken most of her men to supply his wants for those sicke he left a shore, and beeing vnder saile we shaped our course South West for Algiere.
            The 27. about ten in the morning we came to an Anchor in Algier roade in 27. fadome water out of command of the towne or Castle, the Admirall and Rere-Admirall wearing white ancients on their poopes, the rest of the fleete wearing no ancients at all, going in the whole fleete slatuted the towne with their Ordnance, but the towne gaue vs none again: this day it blew much winde, our Admirall could send no Boates a shore where we rode, we had the Cape some sixe miles of West, North West, the 3. miles of West, and Mount Defourt East, North East about seuen or eight mis of.
            The 28. our Admirall sent a Gentleman a shore one Captaine Squibe with a white flag of

truce in his boate to giue the Vice-Roy to vnderstand the cause of our comming; hereupon the Vice-Roy sent a boate aboord our Admirall with a white flag and foure men in her, one principall man in the towne who deliuered our Admirall, signifying the Vice-Roy had receiued command from the grand Seignour to vse vs with all respect, and that our men might haue the free liberty of the shore to buy fresh victuals or whatsoeuer they wanted; they promised our Admirall if on the morrow hee would send any Gentleman of quality a shore with the kings Maiesties letters, that vpon the shooting off a peece of Ordnance according to our Admirals demād he should receiue sufficient hostages aboord for his safety: this night the Pyrates brought in three prizes, one Flemming, the other two Englishmen, the one a Plimmouth man, & the other of North Yarmouth.
            The 29. in the morning our Admirall sent Captaine Squibe a shore againe with letters, importing as well a speedy dispatch, as also to giue them notice what pledges he demanded for such Gentlemen as were then ready to goe a shore with his Maiesties letters: about foure in the afternoone, our Admirall shooting off a peece of Ordnance according to promise sent Captaine Iohn Roper in his Barge, accompanyed with diuers other Gentlemen of qualitie to carry the Kings letters to the Bashaw & Duana, but before they got a shore word was brought them that

the Principall of the Duana were gone into the Country, and that the pledges were not ready, but the next morning they should not fayle, whereupon they returned a boord againe, this day towards the euening there came in 3. saile of ships, the windes blowing fresh at South West.
            The 30. the Admirall called a generall Councell of all the Captaines and Maisters in the fleet where it was debated, whether the fleet might ride in safety or not, till wee had concluded our businesse here, it was generally concluded that by Gods prouidence wee might ride without hazard.
         
         
            December.
            DEcember the first, in the morning the winde at South West faire weather, came in eight sayle of ships, and one saile, whereof some were Turkes Pyrates, other Pyrates, this day the Admirall sent a shore one Master Iames Friswell to expect our businesse, for whose safety we receiued foure Turkes for hostage: this day in the afternoone came in two ships.
            The second in the morning went out foure sayle of Turkish Pyrates, the wind at South west a fresh gale, this day the Admirall sent Captaine Iohn Roper a shore with his Maiesties letters, and two principall men of the towne were sent a boord in hostage for him.
            
               The third came sixe of the king of Spains ships into the roade, the Admirall striking his flag saluted our Admirall with small shot and Ordnance, this done, he came aboord our Admirall in his boate, and tould him he came in pursuite of certaine Pirates who had taken diuers of their men, who being in a ship of 700. tuns neere Carthagena in fight with a Turkish Pirate, had boorded her, entred her men and taken her, had not there owne ship vnfortunately fallen on fire with a mischance hapning, they were forced to forsake the Turkes ship to saue their owne, and so lost both for being not able to quench the fury of the fire were forced to yeeld themselues to the slauery of the Turkes to saue their liues, being in all 300. men, whereof 30. perished in the fire. This Spanish Admiral sayling neere the town the Turkes 74. great shot at him, and he gaue thē some 16. backe in exchange, but the distance betweene them was so farre, that the shot falling short, no harme was done on either side.
            The fourth, our Admirall receiued from the towne an answer of the Kings letters.
            The sixth, after long debating, finding the Turks perfidious and fickle, as well in detaining our messenger who deliuered his Maiesties letters, notwithstanding wee had sufficient hostages for him, as in breaking all other promises: in the end it was agreed thus, vpon leauing a Consull with them, they would let our messenger come aboord againe; whereupon the Admirall sent a

common man well cloathed by the name of a Consull, whom they receiued with good respect & sending our messenger aboord, receiued their owne pledges, and deliuered vs some 40. poore captiues, which they pretended was all they had in the towne, this was all wee could draw from them.
            The seuenth in the morning our Admiral sent a letter with instruction to our Councell, with another letter to the Bashawe, to let him know how ill wee tooke his perfidious dealing.
            The eight in the morning our Admirall and all the rest of the fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle the winde being West, wee steered away North till noone, and then bearing vp, shaped our course North East and by East, being bound for Calerie.
            The 10. day at night the winde shifted to the South and East, and so to the East.
            The 11, in the morning the winde Easterly the Admirall altered his course, and steered for May lorka.
            The 13. at night hauing the winde West wee came to an Anchor in the Bay of Port Columbra, a Bay on the South side of May lorka.
            The 14. in the morning we weighed, and the same night came to Anchor in the Rode of Alacotha on the North side of the sayde Iland, wee found this to be a very good place, yeelding vs wood, water and ballast, whereof we had great need, the people very kind and courteous bringing

vs great store of all manner of prouisions which we bought at easie rates, whereby we supplyed our wants, and releeued our sicke men whereof we had great store in our fleete.
            The 24. in the morning the fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle the winde at West, South West, the weather thicke and rainy till noone, and then clearing vp, the winde shifted to the South, South East wee sayled out by the North East ende of the Iland.
            The 25. about nine at night came eight or nine sayle of Turks into our fleet, whom so soone as we discouered, we chased them and made diuers shot at them, but by reason it was a darke night, and that they sayled better then our ships, they escaped vs.
            The 26. about three in the after noone we put into Alicant Rode, hoping there to receiue letters of aduice, else some newes of a supply of victuals out of England, but missed both. The 27. at night the Reare-Admirals squadron went out to Sea in pursuit of two Turkes Pyrates, who had not taken aboue three houres before two Flemish ships, the Flemmings quiting there their ships, saued themselues in their boates.
            The 29. the Reare-Admirall returned but saw no Turke.
            The 31. there was great ioyes, triumphs, and solemne processions in the cittie of Alacant for ioy of a great ouerthrow which was giuen to the king of Bohemia.
         
         
            
            Ianuary.
            IAnuarie the first, the Reare-Admirall put to Sea againe with his squadron vpon the discouery of some ships in the Offine who prooued to bee English and French bound in for the Rode of Alicant.
            The second the Reare-Admirall with his squadron returned into the Roade.
            The fourth at night the Constant Reformation and the Golden Phenix had order to go to Sea to seeke two Pyrates ships which wee heard were on the Christian shore.
            The fifth at night the Constant and the Phenix returned into the Rode againe, but met not with any.
            The sixth the Vice-Admirall with his squadron set sayle for Malhaga to see if they could here of any newes of a supply of victuals or whether the two Princes which were long expected were come thither.
            The 12. Master Iohn Duppae came from Carthagena, bringing with him a packet of letters of aduice sent out of England bearing date the 14. of December, he signified that there was sixe months

victuals sent out of England for a supply of his Maiesties ships, and that they were at Malhaga with the two Pinnaces, this night the Rere-Admirall with his squadron was sent to Sea to see if he could meet with certaine Pirates which wee had entelligence of.
            The 13. the Reformation the Samuel and the Restore put to Sea, to see if they could meet with any Pirates.
            The 18. the Reformation with the other ships returned into the Rode, where wee found the reare-Admirall with his squadron likewise returned but met no Pirates.
            The 21. there came a flemish boate with 15. Flemmings in her aboord our Admirall, who being chased by the Turkish Pirates off, of Cap Martine, left their ship and saued themselues by their boate, this night was the Anthelope with other ships sent out to see if they could meete with them.
            The 24. the Anthelope with the other ships returned into the Rode, but met with none.
            The 25. our Admirall being inuited to the English Consuls house, went a shore, where at his arriuall he was entertained with small shot and Ordnance both from the towne and Castle, and at night with fireworkes, running of horses, shooting of Ordnance and other sports, this day Captaine Iohn Roper was dispatched with letters for England.
            The 26. our Admirall returned aboord the

towne giuing him a friendly farewell with their Ordnance.
            The 27. the Admirall with the rest of the fleet set sayle, leauing the Marmaduke behind, whose Captaine and Master were both sicke a shore.
            The 28. at midnight wee met with seuen sayle of Flemmings ships of war neere Cape Paule vnder the command of Captaine Haughton Admirall of Zealand, who the next morning after hee had saluted our Admirall with Ordnance, came aboord in his boate, he told our Admirall he had 22. ships of warre vnder his charge, whom he had diuided into squadrons, imploying them some without the straights, and some within.
            The 30. wee had very much winde at South West, but the weather being cleared we turned to windward till foure in the after noone, and then it blew so hard that we were forced to beare vp the Helme and put roome for Alicant rode.
            31 We came to an Anchor againe in Alicant roade.
         
         
            February.
            FEbruary the first the Rere-Admirall put to Sea with 4. ships, to see if he could meet with any Pyrates, and this day dyed Captaine Eusabey Caue Captaine of the Hercules, and the Admirall disposed the command of the same ship to Captaine Alexander Bret.
            The 5. the Rere-Admirall returned with the other 4. ships but had met none.
            
               The 6. the wind being Easterly, the fleet weighed Anchor about midnight, shaping our course for Malhaga, during the time of our staying here we refreshed our sicke men a shore, hauing conuenient houses prouided for them in the feelds Gardens with carefull people to attend them, prouiding them such necessaries as they should need. The Constant for her part sent a shore 92. persons, who as they recouered their strength were sent for a boord, yet notwithstanding all their care at their departure they were forced to leaue behinde them 42. desperately ill, the Admirall taking order both for them and others, that they should be carefully prouided for vntill the fleets returne.
            The 9. in the euening being a thwart Malhaga wee were in the morning put to lee ward of our port, the wind blowing hard at East.
            The 10. we kept it vp windward what we could but the storme increasing, all the kings ships lost their long boates.
            The 11. we were forced to beare vp for Gibraltar where the same day we came to an Anchor in the Rode all, the Golden Phenix and the Restore who recouered Malhaga.
            The 12. our Admiral dispatched letters to Malhaga to the Vice-Admirall to let him know that he and the rest of the fleete were put into Gibraltar, willing him to repaire thither with the rest of the ships with him if the winde should continue Easterly, but if it came Westerly, then the

Admirall purposed to go to Malhaga.
            The 16. came into the Rode the Vice-Admirall and his squadron with the two Pinnaces which wee so long expected out of England, the one the Mercury of the burden 240. tuns, 65. men, and 20. peeces of Brasse Ordnance, vnder the command of Captaine Phinice Pet; the other the Spye, of the burden of 160. tuns 55. men, and 18. peeces of Brasse Ordnance, vnder the command of Captaine Edward Gyles: there came also two Merchants ships with a supply of victuals for his Maiesties ships.
            The 18. the Zouch Phenix, the Hercules, the Neptune and the Spie put to Sea, with order to ply betweene Gibraltar and Shutte point.
            The 19. the Anthelope put to Sea, and with those ships which went out the day before, had order to ride in Shutie-Rode, to see if they could descry any Pyrates come into the straights.
            The 23. the Rere-Admirall put to Sea with 5. other ships, the Golden Phenix, the Samuel, the Centurion, the Marigold, and the Restore, with order to ride in Tansey Bay, where they were to attend the comming in of diuers Pyrates whom we heare to be without the straights mouth: this day came in a Brigandine from Shutie, who brought our Admirall word, that those ships which had put out the 18. had taken a prize.
            The 24. the Anthelope with the rest of the ships returned bringing with them a prize being a small Frenchman which had 50. buts of Oyle in

her, and diuers Moores and Iewes, men, women and children, passengers bound from Tituon to Algiere, all the Turkes sauing themselues in their boate: this day also came into the Rode Captaine Gyles Penne in a ship of Bristoll from Tituon Rode, bringing a letter from the Mogoden to our Admirall, and two Moores who treated with him concerning the redemption of their people whom our ships had taken, offering for so many Moores, so many English, whom they held in town as slaues, hauing bought them of the Turkes Pyrates.
            The 27. the Samuell and the Centurion returned into the Rode from Tansey, thē also went out the Anthelope, the Zouch Phenix, the Barbery, the Neptune and the Restore, with order to ride at Shutey to see if they could discouer any Pyrates comming into the straights, the winde being Westerly.
            The 28. the winde likewise Westerly, the Reformation hauing taken in some of the captiues, had order to weigh and set sayle for Tituon to treat with the Moores, and to take in her company the Samuell, the Bonauenture, and the ship of Bristoll, where the same day about noone they came to an Anchor in the Rode of Tituon in 12. fadome water, the winde at West.
         
         
            
            March.
            THe first, there came into the Roade to vs our Admirall, the Mercury, the Spye, the Winde at West.
            The second in the afternoone came certaine Moores aboord our Admirall, deliuering him a letter from the Mogoden, importing that on the morrow they would bring downe all the English slaues, whom they would exchange for their owne people.
            The third at twelue of the clocke came two Moores, men of qualitie, a boord our Admirall, to let him know the Mogoden was at the water side; whereupon the Admirall sent Master Edward Clarke Secretary of the Councell of warre to treate with him, who returned the same night without effecting any thing to purpose.
            The fourth, Master Ashfield, Minister of the Reformation dyed, much lamented of the whole company, of whom in the extreame of their sicknesses they had receiued much comfort.
            The fifth, hauing a faire gale at South East, our Admirall with the rest of the fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle for Gibraltar hauing concluded nothing with the Mogoden.
            The sixth wee came to an Anchor in Gibraltar Rode, where wee found our Vice-Admirall with his squadron.
            The 8. the winde Westerly the Anthelope, the Samuell and the Spye set sayle for Tituon.
            
               The 9. in the morning the Admirall, the Reformation, the Mercury, and the Barbery set saile for Tituon, leauing the Vice-Admirall with his squadron behind in the Rode, who had the wind at West, South West, but bringing the straights mouth open found it all Southerly, a hard gale with a stiffe currant setting to the Eastward, the Reformation got that night into Tituon Rode, where they found the Anthelope with the other ships.
            The 10. about ten in the morning the Mercury came into the Rode, but the Admirall and the Barbary being put to lee ward, and not able to turne it vp, bore vp to the helme for Malhaga, this day also in the morning Captaine Penne being ouer confident of the Moores faith and promises, with whom hee had along time traded, went a shore without cautions, whom the Mores made stay of, hoping thereby the better to recouer their owne people whom we held captiues.
            The 11. the wind being Easterly, we all set sayl to Malhaga, the Bristol ship onely staying behinde to see if they would send down their Captaine, who had done them many kinde offices to our Admirall, in comming twice with his ship from Tituon to Gibraltar, onely to treate with our Admirall on their behalfe, and at their request; being out of the Roade we met with the Primrose, whom the Vice-Admirall had sent vnto vs to let vs know that he was gone for Malhaga.
            
               The 13. wee came to an Anchor in Malhaga Roade, where we found our Admirall with the rest of our fleete all but the Good Will, who comming out of Gibraltar with the Vice-Admirals squadron had lost their companies in the night, I in the time we spent here, the fleete tooke in some Beereage, Wine, some Wood and Water.
            The 28. about eight in the morning the Admirall, and Rere-Admirall set sayle for Alicant, leauing behinde the Vice-Admirall with fiue other ships, the Reformation, the Samuell, the Centurion, the Bonauenture, and the Restore, for to attend the conquest of a remainder of a supply of victuals which was to come out of England.
         
         
            Aprill·
            THe 2. my Captaine, Captain Arthur Mannering died, a gentlemā of an excellent temper, not easily moued to passion, though many times occasion hath been purposely offered, he mastred his affections with that discretion that he gained loue euen from his enemyes; in his priuate command hee could so well mixe clemency with seueritie together, that he was both feared and loued, so seriously searching into the mystery of his new profession, that he would soone haue equalled the best Captaine, both for iudgement and command: & his death bred a generall lament

in the whole fleet, and some alteration in the sway of most curious businesse, the wheele euer since turning with the violent motion of a selfe willed mouer.
            The 10. hearing no newes of our supply of victuals, the Vice-Admirall with the other fiue ships set sayle for Alicant the winde West ward.
            The 14. about three in the afternoone we came to an Anchor in Alicant Rode, where wee found our Admirall with the rest of the fleet: here our Admirall had hired a Pollacre about the burden of 120. tunne, for that she was reported to be an excellent sayler, and likewise bought three Brigandines which rowed with nine oares on a side: he also hyred a house wherein hee made diuers workes for the firing of the shippes within the Mould of Algiere.
            The 18. Sir Henrie Palmer and our Admiralls order remooued out of the Anthelope into the Reformation, and Captaine Alexander Bret into the Anthelope, and Sir Thomas Wilsad was made Captaine ouer the Hercules: this day also, my selfe for some respects remoued into the Centurion, notwithstanding I receiued many good perswasions from Sir Henrie Palmer to continue where I was.
            The 21, we receiued letters out of England by a post sent from Malhaga, signifying a remainder of victuals which wee expected was arriued at Malhaga.
            
               The 25. about nine in the morning the whole fleet sayle for Alicant Rode, being bound for Firma terra to supply our wants for wood.
            The 28. in the euening hauing fitted our selues with wood, wee set sayle for Mayorke to take in water.
            The 29. in the afternoone we came to an Anchor in Mayorke Rode. The towne of Maiorke is large and well fortified, the people industrious both men, women and children giuen to labour, louing and courteous to strangers: here we found all manner of victuals in plenty and at easie rates. Their chiefe Marchandise are Oyle, Wood, and Cheese, whereof the countrey affoordeth plenty.
         
         
            May.
            HAuing taken water at three in the morning vpon shooting off a warning peece, the whole fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle for Algiere, the winde Easterly a small breath.
            The 21. at 6. in the afternoone we came to an-Anchor in Algiere Roade, order being first giuen by our Admirall how euery ship should berth her selfe: the manner followeth; first the Kings ships and the Golden Phenix came to an anchor at their place vpon a South and Northline, the Admirall riding in the middest of them, East of the South end of the Mould. Next to the Admirall

on the North side came to an anchor the Reformation, the Golden Phenix on the South, the Conuertine on the Southside, the Phenixe and Anthelope on the Northside the Reformation, the Vice-admirall innermost on the Southside, the Rere-admirall vttermost on the North side.
            The kings ships hauing berthed themselues, the rest of the fleete who this time plyed vp and downe vnder sayle, came to a Sterne to the Admirals of their squadrons, giuing good berthes one to another, the winde being then Westerly: but if the winde had beene Easterly, then were they to haue beene anchored a head between the Kings ships and the Easterne shore, keeping the Kings ships and the Phenix betweene them and the towne, where the force of the Pyrates remained.
            The ships being come to an anchor in their orders, our Admirall caused sixe of the Marchants ships presently to weigh, with directions to ply off and on of the Westermost part, keeping as neere the shore as conueniently they might, to preuent the comming in of any Pyrates between the fleete and the shore. In the beginning of this night the Boats and Brigandines appointed for the assistance of two ships which our Admirall resolued should that night goe into the Mould, and there to set themselues on fire, being chained and linked to the Pyrates ships, repaired aboord our Admirall there to receiue their directions. The manner and preparations for firing of the

ships was thus.
            First, there were two small ships which we had taken from the Turkes, the one of the burden of an hundred tunnes, the other of sixtie, with great store of fire-workes in them. There was layde in them plenty of dry wood, wood of Ocham, Pitch Rozen, Tarre, Brimstone and other materials fit to take fire: they had likewise in them Chaines and Grapnels of iron to fasten themselues to the ships which they were to fire: they had also boates to bring off their men when they had fired the ships: then were there three Brigandines fitted with fire-bals, buckets of wilde-fire, and fire pikes to make their fire-workes fast vnto the ships: there was also a Gundlod fitted with fire-workes, Chaines and Grapnels of iron; shee was to goe into the middest of the ships in the Mould, where fastning her to some ship, was to be set on fire. She had likewise with her a boat to bring off her men. Likewise there were seuen boates which we called boates of rescue, well filled with armed men, who were to rescue and releeue the boates of execution if they should chance to be pursued by other boates or gallyes at their comming off. These had also fire-workes in them to fire the ships which rode without the Mould: these boates being all aboord, the Admirall sent for most of the Captains and Masters in the fleete to aduise whether it were fit to attempt it with boates and Brigandines, in regard it was little winde, and that Westerly, so that it

was impossible for the ships to get in. After some deliberation, it was concluded that it was not fit for that the surest and most certaine meanes of firing was by the ships which were to bee made fast to the ships in the Mould, and to burne with them. Whereupon it was deferred for that time till a fitter opportunity was offered.
            The 22. at night there were like preparations made, but deferred for like reasons.
            The 23. in the beginning of the night wee had a fresh gale of wind at South by South west continuing the space of two houres or more, with thunder, lightning, and some drops of raine: the two ships weighed, and with the Brigandines and Boates set forwards towards the Mould, but the winde shifting before they came neere, they were forced also to giue ouer for that night.
            The 24. at night after a great showre of raine, we had the wind out of the Bay at Sourh, South West, the weather then cleering vp, both the ships and boates aduanced themselues toward Mould as before they had done: but comming within lesse then Musket shot of the Moulds head it fell calme, so that the ships could by no meanes get in, the Boates and Brigandines finding that they were discouered by reason of the brightnesse of the Moone which was then at full, and hearing it reported by a Christian captiue which did swimme from the towne the night before to the ships, that the Turkes had left their shippes without

guard sauing one or two in a ship, as fearing no such attempt from vs. And moreouer hearing the Alarum giuen to the towne by those which ktpt watch on the walles, with good resolution went on, but wanting winde to nourish and disperse the fire, the fire-workes tooke no effect at all. In this seruice were onely sixe men slaine out right, foure or fiue dangerously hurt (which not long after dyed) and some thirteene sleightly hurt, yet notwithstanding the attempt was giuen vnder the walles of the towne, where both small shot and Ordnance played continually vpon them: the hurt done our men was their comming off, for that they were got into the Mould before the towne was risen, and being in, the ships in the Mould defended them both from small shot and ordnance of the towne, our boats still keeping the ships betweene them and the towne.
            The 25. there came in foure saile of Pyrates by the Wester most point of land notwithstanding 6. ships were appointed to lye off at that place, for the wind being Westward and a great currant setting to the Eastward, our ships were put so farre to leeward that they could not preuent the pyrates coming in betweene the shore and them, but yet the Bonauenture loosed so neere that there passed some shot betweene her and the Pyrates ships, but no hurt done: this night our Admirall and the whole fleete weighed Anchor and stood off to the Sea.
            
               The 26. the fore part of the day the wind was shifting to and fro, from the South-east to the South-west; in the afternoone at South, and South South-east hard gale and rainy weather; and at night hauing the winde shifting at South and South-west, we played off and on all night by a winde.
            The 27. we had a fresh gale at West, and west North-west, and this euening we saw two ships to wind-ward of vs, but what they were I know not.
            The 28. We had faire weather the wind Westerly, this night the Bonauenture and the Hercules put a Pyrate a shore, hee hauing a hundred and thirty Turks in her, and twelue poore Christians captiues, they were al drowned but twelue Turkes who got the shore by swimming.
            The 30. we got into the Bay and Anchored three miles off the towne, and in turning in, the towne and castle made 15. great shot at the vantguard, the Rainbow, and two other, Marchants ships, but did no hurt.
            The 31. in the morning our boates tooke vp two Genoways captiues, who aduentured to swim from the towne to the ships. They tould that the same night our ships stood off to Sea, there came into the Mould seuen of the best ships belonging to Algiere, and that if we had stayed they had fallen into our laps. They likewise told vs that the Turks had Boomed vp the Mould, so that it was not possible for either ship or boate to get in

to fire the ships, which were now filled with armed men, besides three gallyes and 15. boates which lay continually well fitted without the Mould before the Boome for a Guard.
         
         
            Iune.
            THe second our ships that were appointed to ply it too and againe before the Rode, tooke a ship off of the Easterne point of the Bay, which came from Legorne and was bound for Algiere for trade with diuers Merchants Iewes in her, and a Flemming who had diuers letters from the Prince of Orange and the States, both to the Bashaw and Duana: shee was laden with Venice cloth, Legorne dishes, and diuers other commodities: there was also found in her two or three thousand pound in ready money: this morning the weather calme, three gallyes rowed out of the Mould by our ships, at whom wee made diuers shot, but few or none did reach them they were so farre off. At night they returned to the Mould a gaine. During the time of our ships riding before the towne we sent euery night certain boats which kept watch betweene the towne and the fleete, as well to giue the fleet Alarums vpon all occasions, as to take vp and saue such poore Christian captiues as should aduenture to saue

themselues by swimming from the slauery of the Turkes: which boates saued diuers both Spanish, French and Dutch, by whom we were certainely informed as well of the Booming vp of the Mould, as of the drowning of an hundred and thirty Turkes.
            The fourth, finding those relations to be true, and that there was no possibility of doing any more seruice vpon the Pyrates at that time, vppon the shooting off a warning peece from the Admirall, the whole fleet set sayle for Alicant.
            The eight in the morning we came to anchor in Alicant Rode, where wee found Captaine Iohn Roper who was returned out of England with letters from my Lord Admirall, and order for the present discharging and sending home of foure of the Kings shippes, that is to say, the Vantguard, the Rainebow, the Reformation, and the Anthelope.
            Here we stayed till the thirteenth day in which time wee refreshed our selues with water and fresh victuals, and sold away the priczes which we had taken, payed our debts which we owed at our former being there, for prouisions for the fleete; here our Admirall discharged the Pollacre which he hyred: here also he deliuered seuen & twenty Turkes a shore for their ransomes to Seigniour Emperiall Consull for the English.
            The thirteenth about ten at midnight the Admirall shot off a warning peece, whereupon all

the fleete weighed Anchor and set sayle for Malhaga.
            The sixteenth, wee met with twelue sayle of Flemmings of Cape Legat, whereof fiue were Holland men of warre vnder the command of Captaine Quashe, the rest Marchants ships.
            The 21. the whole fleete met at Anchor in Malhaga Rode.
         
         
            Iuly.
            THe third in the morning it was signified to the Admirall and the Councell of Warre vnder the Masters and Officers hands of the Lyon, that she was so defectiue that she could not any longer be continued out, without eminent peril of perishing, wherupon it was thought fit and resolued, that notwithstanding my Lord Admirals order was to send home the Vanguard she should bee continued out till the next supply of shipping, and that the Lyon should bee sent home: wherevpon our Admirall with his prouisions presently remoued into the Vanguard, and Sir Richard Hawkins into the Lyon. Here wee also dismissed by our Admirals order Zouch Phenix, the Marigold, the Primrose & the Restore, sufficient reasons by the Masters being

giuen, that they were vnfit for longer seruice.
            The fifth, I remoued my selfe into the Reformation, hauing got passage for England.
            The sixth hauing taken in our remainder of of victuals, some Beuerage, Wine, Water, and Oyle, the whole fleete set sayle hauing a small breath off the shore North West, got no further then the Molena poynt.
            The seuenth, hauing little winde that while, and currant against vs, wee gayned little or nothing.
            The eight, the Reformation and three or foure other ships got at Virgerow-Rode, where they came to an Anchor, the Admirall and the rest of the fleete not gayning any thing, were faine to Anchor at Malhaga poynt, the winde at West South West fayre weather.
            The tenth, about eight in the morning a faire gale springing all North East, the fleete set sayle our Admirall bound for Cales.
            The twelfth, the whole fleet being come within three or foure miles of the towne of Cales, the Vice-Admirall, Rere-Admirall, and the rest of the ships bound for England, tooke their leaues of the Admirall and the rest of the fleete, foure or fiue hundred peeces of Ordnance being discharged on both sides for a farewell, the Admirall with his company stood in for Cales, the Vice-Admirall and the rest of the ships stood off to Sea, the winde at South West, and by the West.
            
               The fifteenth and sixteenth we had little wind and that variable, but so thicke a fogge both dayes, wee could hardly see two ships length from vs.
            The seuenteenth in the morning the weather reasonable cleare, wee had lost sight of all our fleete, but the Anthelope and the Marigold, and hauing Cape Saker North, North East some foure leagues of, and the winde Northerly a hard gale we came to an Anchor in the Bay, here we Rode vntill the three and twentieth, all this time the wind blowinng at North, North West very stormy.
            The fiue and twentieth the wind arsed against the Sunne to the West, South West, the Cape bearing East thirty leagues off. The eight and twentieth wee lost sight of the Anthelope and Marigold in the Latittude of 41.32. leagues off the shore.
         
         
            August.
            AVgust the second wee heaued the Lead and had ground at 94. fadome vshant East, N. East 26. leagues off.
            The third at foure in the afternoone we fell with the Bolt.
         
         
            
            The number of the ships Brigandines and boates which were appointed to goe into the Mould to fire the ships with the names of the Captaines that Commanded them.
            CAptaine Walsingham, and Captaine Stokes, Captaines of the two ships to be fired in the Mould.
            Captaine Hughes, Captaine Tall, Captaine Pepwell, Captaines of the three Brigandines.
         
         
            
            THE CAPTAINES OF the Boates.
            
               CAptaine Frampton, Liefetenant to Sir Richard Hawkins.
               Captaine Winker Liefetenant to Sir Henrie Palmer.
               Captaine Turner out of the Admirall.
               Captaine Dodge, Liefetenant to Sir Francis Tanfield.
               Captaine Boyes in Captaine Argels boat.
               Captaine Frewen, Lieftenant to Captaine Haughton.
               Captaine Button, Liefetenant to Sir Thomas Button.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   
