<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         THE
STRANGE
AND DANGEROVS
VOYAGE OF
Captaine THOMAS IAMES, in
his intended Discouery of the Northwest
Passage into the South Sea.
         VVHEREIN
THE MISERIES INDVRED BOTH
Going, Wintering, Returning; and the Rarities
obserued, both Philosophicall and Mathematicall,
are related in this Iournall of it.
         Published by His MAIESTIES
command.
         To which are added, A Plat or Card for the
Sayling in those Seas.
         Diuers little Tables of the Author's, of the Variation
of the Compasse, &c.
         VVITH
An Appendix concerning Longitude, by Master
HENRY GELLIBRAND Astronomy Reader
of Gresham Colledge in London.
         AND
An Aduise concerning the Philosophy of these late
Discoueryes, By W. W.
         LONDON,
Printed by Iohn Legatt, for Iohn Partridge.
1633.
      
      
         
         
         TO THE KINGS MOST
excellent and Sacred
MAIESTIE.
         
            Most dread Soueraigne,
         
         THAT my vnskilfull selfe was made
choyce of for this imployment,
and my vndertaking in it encouraged
by Your gracious commandement;
I must euer account of for
the greatest honour, that euer yet
befell mee. Many a Storme, and
Rocke, and Mist, and Wind, and Tyde, and Sea, and
Mount of Ice, haue I in this Discouery encountred
withall; Many a despaire and death had, almost, ouerwhelmed
mee; but still the remembrance of the Accompt
that I was to giue of it to so gracious a Maiesty,
put me in heart againe; made mee not to giue way to
mine owne feares, or the infirmities of humanitie. Your
Majestie in my employment (like a true Father of your
Countrey) intended the good of your Subjects: and
who is not bound to blesse God for your Royall care
in it? Had it, now, beene my fortune, to haue done my
Countrey this seruice, as to haue brought home the
newes of this supposed and long sought for Passage;

then should the Merchant haue enjoyed the sweetnesse
of the hoped profit, and the Subject haue beene sensible
of the benefit of your Majesties royall intentions in it.
I haue done my good will in it: and though not brought
home that newes, yet shall I here divulge those obseruations;
which may (I hope) become some way beneficiall
vnto my Countrey. The Accompt of them, I
here, in all humilitie, offer vnto your most Iudicious
Majesty. Your gracious acceptance of what I had
done, though I had not done what was expected, emboldeneth
me to doe so: and since your Majestie was
pleased to signifie your desires, of hauing a Briefe of
my Voyage presented vnto you: that word became a
Command vnto mee, to draw this rude Abstract of it.
Your Majestie will please to consider, That they were
rough elements, which I had to doe withall: and will,
with fauour, vouchsafe to pardon, if a Sea-mans style
be like what he most conuerseth with. In the plainenesse
therefore of well-meaning, since your Majestie
hath beene so gracious to mee, as to appoint mee your
Seruant, I am now bound to vow you my seruice: and
it shall be my honour to be commanded it: and I shall
account no dangers too great, in the going thorow it.
These are the resolutions of
         
            Your Majesties humblest Subject
and Seruant,
THOMAS IAMES.
         
      
      
         
         To my worthy friend and fellow-Templar
Captaine IAMES.
         I Haue perused your Iournall. To commend
it, were to dispraise it; Good
wine needs no Ensigne: Mos est faeda
coloribus abdere: yet this I must
needs say, you haue shewed your selfe
to be a Master of your Art. The
Miles in acle probatur Gubernator in tempestate dignoscitur. worth of a Warrier and Pylot is
neuer discouered but in stormes and skirmishes, and
how many skirmishes of stormes and tempests you haue
past, this Iournall of yours doth sufficiently manifest: Goe
on then, and as you haue begun well, so when any good occasion
is offered, second your good beginnings with sutable
proceedings: and let not the cold entertainment you haue
had in the frozen Seas freeze vp your affections in vndertaking
other worthy employments. So may you deserue,
with Columbus, Drake, and Frobusher, to haue the
remembrance of you smell sweetly in the nostrils of posteritie,
when you are in the dust. Farewell,
         
            From the Inner Temple,
            THOMAS NASH.
         
      
      
         
         THe Printer desires to be excused to the Courteous Reader, if in an
Argument of this Nature, the Compositer, not throughly acquainted
with termes of Nauigation, hath sometimes, which he feareth, and in some
words mistaken the Authors minde; as in flowed for stood &c. promising
a future amends (if Occasion profer it selfe) by a more exact Impression.
         Farewell.
      
   
   
      
         
         THE
PREPARATIONS TO
THE VOYAGE.
         HAuing bin for many yeeres importuned,
by my Honorable and worshipfull
friends; to vndertake the
discouery of that part of the world,
which is commonly called The
North-west Passage into the
South Sea; and so to proceed to
Iapan, and to round the world to
the Westward; Being prest forward withall, by signifying
to mee the earnest desire the Kings most excellent Maiestie
had, to be satisfied therein: I acquainted my much
Honoured friends the Merchants of Bristoll therewith:
who as euer they haue bin Benefactors and Aduancers of
them that pursue the wayes of Honour: together with the
enlargement and benefit of his Maiesties Kingdomes: did
freely offer to bee at the charge of furnishing forth shipping
for this purpose. And now being thus enabled, I
addrest my selfe to the Honourable Sir Thomas Roe,
Knight (as to a learned, and furthest employed traueller

by Sea and Land, this day in England) who ioyfully presented
theirs and mine owne voluntary willingnesse, to doe
his Maiesties Seruice in this kinde: who most graciously
accepted of the offer; and encouraged mee by many fauours
in my weake vndertakings. Wherefore with all speed I contriued
in my mind, the best modell I could; wherby I might
effect my designe. The Adventurers monies were instantly
ready, and put into a Treasurers hand: that there might
be no want of present pay, for any thing I thought necessary
for the Voyage.
         I was euer of the opinion, that this particular action
might be better effected by one ship, then by two consorted:
because in those Icie Seas, so much subiect to fogs, they
might be easily separated; I forbeare to speake of stormes
and other accidents: as that a Rendezvous in discoueries,
cannot surely, or without much hinderance be appointed:
and that speedy perseuerance is the life of such a businesse.
Wherefore I resolued to haue but one Ship, the Ship-boate,
and a Shallop.
         A great Ship (as by former experience I had found)
was vnfit to be forc'd thorow the Ice: wherefore I made
choice of a well-conditioned, strong Ship, of the burthen
of seuentie Tunne: and in God and that only Ship, to put
the hope of my future fortunes.
         The Ship resolued vpon, and that in lesse time then
18. moneths our voyage could not be effected: I next considered
how our Ship of seuentie Tuns in bulke and weight
might now be proportioned; in victuals, namely, and other
necessaries: this was all done, as contractedly as we could:
and the number of men it would serue, at ordinary allowance,
for the forementioned time; was found to be twenty
two, a small number to performe such a businesse, yet

double sufficient to sayle the Ship, with prouident carefulnesse.
         The Baker, Brewer, Butcher, and others, vndertake their
Offices vpon their credits; knowing it to be a generall businesse,
and their vtter vndoing if they fayled in performance,
but truly they prooued themselues Masters in their
Arts; and haue my praise for their honest care: in them
consisting a great part of the performance of the voyage.
         The Carpenters goe in hand with the Ship: to make
her as strong and seruiceable, as possibly in their vnderstandings
they could.
         Euery thing being duly proportioned, and my small
number of men knowne; I began to thinke of the quality
and abilitie they should be of.
         Voluntary loyterers I at first disclaimed, and published
I would haue all vnmarried, approoued, able, and healthy
Sea-men: in a few dayes an abundant number presented
themselues; furnished with generall sufficiencie in marine
occasions; I first made choice of a Boate-swayne;
and some to worke with him, for fitting the rigging of the
Ship: and as things went forward, shipt the subordinate
Crue; and all things being perfectly ready, I shipt the
Masters mates, and last of all, the Master of my Ship,
and my Liefetenant. The whole company were strangers
to me, and to each other (as by way of familiaritie) but
yet priuately recommended by worthy Merchants, for their
abilitie and faithfulnesse. I was sought to by diuers, that
had bin in places of the chiefest command in this action
formerly; and others also that had vsed the Northerly
Icie Seas: but I vtterly refused them all, and would by
no meanes haue any with mee that had bin in the like voyage,
or aduentures, for some priuate reasons vnnecessary

here to be related; keeping thus the power in my owne
hands I had all the men to acknowledge immediate
dependance vpon my selfe alone; both for direction and
disposing of all, as well of the Nauigation, as all other
things whatsoeuer.
         In the meane time, the better to strengthen my former
studies in this businesse, I seeke after Iournals, Plots,
Discourses; or what-euer else might helpe my vnderstanding.
         I set skilfull workemen to make me Quadrants, Staues,
Semicircles, &c. as much, namely, as concerne the Fabricke
of them: not trusting to their Mechannicke hands,
to diuide them; but had them diuided by an ingenious
practitioner in the Mathematicks. I likewise had Compasse-needles
made after the most reasonablest and truest
wayes that could be thought on: and by the first of April,
euery thing was ready to be put together into our hopefull
Ship.
         In the meane space, I made a Iourney vp to London, to
know his Maiesties further pleasure; and to make knowne
to him my readiness: who calling for the forementioned
Honourable Knight, I speedily after receiued his Maiesties
Royall Letters; with directions for proceeding in my voyage,
and my discharge: whereupon I had foorth the Ship
into the Rode, expecting a faire winde to begin the voyage.
      
      
         
         A Voyage for the discouering
a Passage to the South Sea.
         THE second of May,May 2. 1631. I tooke
my leaue of the Worshipfull Merchant
Aduenturers in this Action, in the Citie
of Bristoll: and being accompanied with
a Reuerend Diuine, one Master Thomas
Palmer, and diuers of the Merchants,
with others of my kindred and natiue
Countrey-men; I repaired aboord. Here
Master Palmer made a Sermon: exhorting vs to continue
brotherly loue amongst vs, and to be bold to professe the true
Christian Religion where-euer we should happen, in this our
perigrination. After they had receiued such entertainment,
as my estate could affoord them; they departed for Bristoll.
This afternoone, I made reuiew of all things; aswell of
clothes, and other necessaries, as of victuals; and where there
was found any want, wee were presently furnished.
         The third of May (after Prayer for a prosperous successe
to our endeauours)3. about three a clocke in the afternoone we
came to Sayle: and Stode downe the Channell of Seuerne,
with little winde, but slowly got forward to the Westward
of Lundie; and then the winde opposed it selfe so strongly
against vs, that wee were driuen to beare vp and come to an
Anker in Lundie-Rode the fifth in the euening; where we remained
vntill the eighth in the morning. Now hoping the
winde would fauour vs, wee came to Sayle; but wee were
forc'd to put into Milford: where we came to an Anker

about mid-night. Here we remained till the seuenteenth in
the morning; when with the first fauouring winde, we proceeded
and doubled about Cape Cleere of Ireland.May 22. The two
and twentieth we were in Latitude 51: 26. and the Blaskes
did beare of vs North-east, about twelue leagues off: which
Blaskes is in Lat. 52. 4. Here I ordred the course that should
bee kept: which was generally West North-west, as the
winde would giue leaue: which in this Course and distance,
is very variable and vnconstant.Iune 4. The fourth of Iune we made
the land of Groynland: standing in with it to haue knowledge
of the trending of it; It prooued very thicke foule weather;
and the next day,5. by two a clocke in the morning, we found
our selues incompassed about with Ice: and endeauouring to
cleere our selues of it (by reason we could not see farre about
vs) we were the more ingaged, and strooke many fearefull
blowes against it: At length we made fast to a great piece,
(it blowing a very storme) and with poles wrought day and
night to keepe off the Ice; in which labour we broke all our
poles.6. The sixth, about two a clocke in the morning, we were
beset with many extraordinary great pieces of Ice, that came
vpon vs, as it were with wilfull violence: and doubtlesse had
crushed vs to pieces, if we had not let fall some Sayle which
the Ship presently felt. In scaping that danger, we ran against
another great piece, that we doubted whether our Ship had
not bin stav'd to pieces. But pumping, we found she made no
water. The former pieces of Ice, had crushed our Shallop
all to pieces; wherefore I caused our long Boate speedily to
be had vp from betwixt the Decks, and put ouer Boord: by
helpe whereof we againe recouered our broken Shallop; and
had her vp on the Decks, intending to new build her. All this
day, we did beat, and were beaten fearefully, amongst the Ice;
it blowing a very storme. In the euening, wee were inclosed
amongst great pieces; as high as our Poope: and some of the
sharpe blue corners of them, did reach quite vnder vs. All
these great pieces (by reason it was the out-side of the Ice)
did heaue and set, and so beat vs; that it was wonderfull how
the Ship could indure one blow of it; but it was Gods only

preseruation of vs, to whom be all honour and glory. In this
extremitie, I made the men to let fall, and make what Sayle
they could; and the Ship forced her selfe thorow it: though
so tossed and beaten, as I thinke neuer Ship was. When we
were cleere, we sayed the pumps, and found her stanch: vpon
which we went instantly to prayer, and to praise God for his
mercifull deliuery of vs.
         The seuenth and eighth dayes,7. & 8. we indeauoured to double
about Cape Farewell; being still pestered with much Ice.
         The ninth,9. we were in Lat. 59. 00. and we made account
the Cape Farewell bare of vs due East, and some ten leagues
off. The Blaskes in Ireland, is in Lat. 52. 4. and Cape Farewell
in Lat. 59. 00. The course is West North-west: and
the distance about 410. leagues: I know very well these Latitudes,
courses and distance, doe not exactly agree with Mathematicall
conclusions: but thus we found it by practice. The
variation of the Compasse in Lat. 52. 30. and 30. leagues to
the Westward of Ireland, is about 3. 00. to the Eastward; in
Lat. 57. 00. about 310. leagues, West North-west, from the
Blaskes, the Compasse doth vary 9. 00. to the West-ward:
in Lat. 59. 15. some 40 leagues to the East-ward, of Cape
Farewell, the variation is about 14. 45. In this course I haue
bin obseruant whether there were any Currant that did set to
the N. E. as some haue written there did, and that as well in
Calme weather, as other-wayes: But I could not perceiue
any. The windes here are variable; and the Sea of an vnsearchable
depth. We haue not seene from Ireland hitherto,
any Whales or other Fish; The weather, for the most part,
was foggie and mistie, that wets as bad as raine.
         The tenth,10. all the morning, was very foule weather: and
a high-growne Sea: although we had Ice not farre off about
vs, and some pieces, as high as our Top-mast-head. Our long
Boate, which we were faine to Towe at Sterne (by reason
we were building our Shallop on our Decks) broke away,
and put vs to some trouble to recouer her againe. This we
did, and made meanes to haue her into the Ship, though very
much bruised: and that I had two men sore hurt, and like to

be lost in the hauing of her in. By eight a clocke this euening,
we were shot vp as high as Cape Desolation: for finding here
the Land to trend away North and by East, we certainly knew
it to be the Cape. It stands in Lat. 60. 00. and the Land from
Cape Farewell to it, trends N. W. the distance about 40.
leagues. The distance from Cape Desolation, to the South
end of the Iland of Resolution, is about 140. leagues: the
course West, halfe a point North. The Lat. of the South
end of the Iland, being 61. 20. some 12. leagues to the Westward
of Cape Desolation, the variation is 16. 00. In this
course, we were much tormented, pestered and beaten with
the Ice: many pieces being higher then our Top-mast-head.
In our way, we saw many Grampusses amongst the Ice; and
it seemeth the Sea is full of them: The weather for the most
part, a stinking fogge; and the Sea, very blacke: which I conceiue
to be occasioned by reason of the fogge.
         The seuenteenth at night,17. we heard the rutt of the shoare,
as we thought: but it prooued to be the rutt against a banke
of Ice, that lay on the shoare. It made a hollow and a hideous
noyse, like an ouer-fall of water: which made vs to reason
amongst our selues concerning it: for we were not able
to see about vs, it being darke night, and foggie. We stood
off from it, till breake of day; then in againe: and about 4. a
clocke in the morning wee saw the Land aboue the fogge:
which we knew to be the Iland of Resolution. This last night
was so cold, that all our Rigging and Sayles were frozen.
Wee endeauoured to compasse about the Southern point of
the Iland: for that we were so much pestered with the Ice,
and blinded with a very thicke fogge. Here runnes a quicke
tyde into the Straight; but the ebbe is as strong as the flood;
The fogge was of such a piercing nature, that it spoiled all our
Compasses, and made them flagge; and so heauy withall,
that they would not trauerse. Wherefore I would aduise
any, that shall Sayle this way hereafter, to prouide Compasses
of Muscouia Glasse, or some other matter, that will endure
the moisture of the weather. As the fogge cleered vp, we
could see the entrance of the Straight, to be all full of Ice

close thronged together. Indeauouring to goe forward, wee
were fast inclosed amongst it; and so droue to and againe
with it, finding no ground at 230. fad. 4. leagues from the
shoare.
         The twentieth in the morning, we had got about the Southerne
point of the Iland;20 and the winde came vp at West,
and droue both vs and the Ice vpon the shoare. When we
were driuen within two leagues of the shoare, we came amongst
the most strangest whirlings of the Sea, that possibly
can bee conceiued; There were diuers great pieces of Ice a-ground
in 40. fad. water, and the ebbe comming out of the
broken grounds of the Iland, amongst these Iles of Ice, made
such a distractio?? that we were carryed round: sometimes close
by the Rocks; sometimes close by those high pieces: that
we were afeard they would fall vpon vs. We were so beaten
likewise with the encountering of the Ice, that we were
in a most desperate estate: We made fast two great pieces of
Ice to our sides, with our Kedger and Grapnels, that drew
9. or 10. fad. that so they might be a-ground before vs, if so
be we were driuen on the shoare. But that designe fayled vs:
and now from the top seeing in amongst the Rocks, I sent
the Boate (for now wee had finished her) to see if shee
could finde some place of securitie: but shee was no sooner
parted, but shee was inclosed, and driuen to hale vp on the
Ice, or else shee had beene crushed to pieces. They ranne her
ouer the Ice from piece to piece: and in the meane space,
with the whirling and incountring of the Ice, the two pieces
brake away from our sides, and carryed away our Kedger and
Grapnels: Then we made signes to the Boate, to make all
the haste shee could to vs: which shee perceiuing, did: the
men being with much difficultie inforced to hale her ouer
many pieces of Ice. In the meane space, we made some Sayle;
and got to that piece of Ice, that had our Grapnell on it:
which wee againe recouered. By this time, was our Boate
come; and We put afresh Crue into her, and sent her to
fetch our Kedger: which shee endeauoured with much danger
of Beate and Men. By this time, the Ship was driuen so

neere the shoare, that we could see the Rocks vnder vs and
about vs: and we should be carryed with the whirlings of
the waters, close by the points of Rocks, and then round about
backe againe: and all this, notwithstanding the Sayle
we had abroad; that wee expected continually when shee
would be beaten to pieces. In this extremitie, I made them
to open more Sayle, and to force her in amongst the Rocks
and broken grounds: and where there was many great pieces
of Ice aground. We went ouer Rocks, that had but 12. or
13. foot water on them; and so let fall an Anker. This Anker
had neuer bin able to winde vp the Ship, but that, (by
good fortune) the Ship ranne against a great piece of Ice,
that was a-ground. This rush, brake the Mayne knee of her
Beake head, and a corner of it: tare away 4. of our maine
Shrouds, and an Anker that we had at the Bowe, fastened into
it: and so stopt her way, that she did winde vp to her Anker.
Wee saw the sharpe Rocks vnder vs, and about vs; and had
but 15. foot water: being also in the sides way, where all
the Ice would driue vpon vs: Our Boate we could not see;
which made vs doubt shee had bin crushed to pieces. In her,
was the third part of our company: but by and by we saw
her come about a point amongst the Rocks. Shee had recouered
our Kedger; which made vs something ioyfull; With
all speed we laid out Hawsers to the Rocks; and euery one
did worke to the best of his strength, to Warp her out of
this dangerous place, to the Rocks sides: where wee had
3. fad. water, and were vnder the shelter of a great piece of
Ice that was a-ground, which should keepe off the Ice, that
otherwise would haue driuen vpon vs. Here wee lay very
well all the ebbe; but when the stood came, we were assaulted
with pieces of Ice, that euery halfe houre put vs into
despayrable distresse. We did worke continually, and extremely,
to keepe off the Ice. At full Sea, our great piece of Ice
(which was our buckler) was afloate; and doe what wee
could, got away from vs, and left vs in a most eminent danger,
by reason of the Ice that droue in vpon vs. But the ebbe
being once made, this great piece of Ice came againe a-ground

very fauourable to vs; and sheltered vs all the rest of the,
ebbe. All night we wrought hard, to shift our Cables and
Hawsers; and to make them fast aloft on the Rocks, that the
Ice might the better passe vnder them. All day, and all night,
it snowed hard; and blew a very storme at West; which
droue in all the Ice out of the Sea vpon vs. In working against
the violence of the Ice, the flooke of our Kedger was
broken; two armes of our Grapnels, and two Hawsers, our
Shallop being againe very much bruised: whereupon to work
we goe on all hands to repaire it.
         This tyde,21 the Harbour was choaked full of Ice; so that
it did seeme firme and vnmooueable: but when the ebbe was
made, it did mooue. Some great pieces came a-ground; which
did alter the course of the other Ice, and put vs on the Rocks.
Here, notwithstanding all our vttermost endeauours, she settled
vpon a sharpe Rocke; about a yard aboue the Mayne
Mast; and as the water ebbed away, she hung after the Head,
and heeld to the Offing. We made Cables and Hawsers aloft
to her Masts, and so to the Rocks; straining them tough with
our Tackles: but shee as the water ebbed away, sunke still;
that at length shee was so turned ouer, that wee could not
stand in her. Hauing now done all to the best of our vnderstandings
(but to little purpose) we went all vpon a piece of
Ice and fell to prayer; beseeching God to be mercifull vnto
vs. It wanted yet an houre to low-water: and the tyde did
want a foot and a halfe to ebbe, to what it had ebbed the last
tyde. We were carefull obseruers of the low-waters, and
had marks by stones and other things which we had set vp,
so that we could not be deceiued. The Ship was so turn'd ouer,
that the Portlesse of the Fore-castell, was in the water:
and we did looke euery minute, when shee would ouer-set.
Indeed at one time, the Cables gaue way; and shee sunke
downe halfe a foot at that slip: but vnexpectedly it began to
flow, and sensibly wee perceiued the water to rise apace; and
the Shippe withall. Then was our sorrow turned to ioy,
and we all fell on our knees, praising God for his mercy, in so
miraculous a deliuerance.
         
            
As soone as she was freed from this Rocke, we wrought
hard to get her further off. All the flood, we were pretty
quiet from the Ice: but when the ebbe was made, the Ice
came all driuing againe vpon vs; which put vs to a great extremity.
We got as many pieces betwixt vs and the Rockes,
as we could; to fence vs from the Rockes. There came a
great piece vpon our quarter, which was aboue 300. of my paces
about, but it came a-ground. Thus did diuers great pieces
besides; which was the occasion, that this tyde the Harbour
was quite choakt vp: so that a man might goe any way ouer
it, from side to side. When it was three quarters ebbe,
these great pieces that came a-ground, began to breake with
a most terrible thundering noyse: which put vs in a great
feare, that those about vs would breake vs all to pieces. But
God preserued vs.
         This morning the water veer'd to a lower ebbe then the
last tide it had done,22. by two foote; whereby we saw Gods
mercies apparent in our late extremity. That flood, wee had
some respit from our labours; but after full sea, our hopes
ebde too. The great peece that was by vs, so stopt the Channell,
that the Ice came all driuing vpon vs; so that now, vndoubtedly
we thought wee should haue lost our Ship. To
worke thereupon we goe, with axes, barres of iron, and any
thing proper for such a purpose; to breake the corners of the
Ice, and to make way for it to driue away from vs. It pleased
God to giue good successe to our labours; and we made way
for some, and fended off the rest; and got so much of the softer
sort of the Ice betwixt vs and the Rockes, that we were
in pretty security. But at low-water, those peeces that were
aground, breaking; kept a most thundering noyse about vs.
This day I went ashore; and built a great Beacon with stones
vpon the highest place of the Iland; and put a Crosse vpon it;
and named this Harbour, The Harbour of Gods Prouidence.
In the Euening, the Harbour was fuller of the Ice, then euer
it had beene since we came hither: and the greater peeces
grounded, and stopt the rest, that none went out the ebbe,
but the Ship lay, as if shee had laine in a bed of Ice.
         
            
The three and twentieth day in the morning,23. with the flood,
the Ice droue vp amongst the broken grounds; and with the
ebbe, droue all out (it being then very calme) except one extraordinary
great peece: which comming aground not farre
from vs, settled it selfe in such a manner, that we much
feard him. But there came no more great Ice after him: otherwise,
we must haue expected as great danger, as at any
time heretofore. I tooke the boate, and went ashoare vpon
the Easterne side; to see if I could finde any place freer from
danger then this vnfortunate place: where amongst the
Rockes, I discried a likely place. From the top of the Hill
where I was, I could see the Ship. It was now almost lowe
water: at which instant the forementioned piece of Ice
brake with a terrible noyse into foure pieces: which made
me doubtfull it had not spoyled the Ship; it being full halfe
mast high. I made what haste I could to the boate, and so
to the Ship, to be satisfied: where I found all well, God be
thanked: for that the Ice had broken from the Ship-ward.
I instantly sent away the boate, to sound the way to a Coue
that I had found: which was a very dangerous passage for
the boate. At her returne, we vn-moord the Ship: and with
what speede possible warpt away from amongst this terrible
Ice. We were not a mile from them, but they brake all to
pieces: and would surely haue made vs beare them company,
but that God was more mercifull vnto vs. We got about the
Rocks, and so into this little Coue which I had so newly discouered.
Here we made fast to the Rockes; and thought our
selues in indifferent safety: which being done, I went ashoare
againe, to wander vp and downe, to see what I could discouer.
I found it all broken Rockie grounds: and not so much
as a tree, herbe, or grasse vpon it: Some Ponds of water there
were in it, which were not yet thawed, and therefore not
ready for the fowle; We found not in the snow any footing
of Deere, or Beares, but Foxes we saw one or two.
         We found where the Saluages had beene; but it was long
since. They had made fiue hearths; and we found a few firebrands
about them; and some heads of Foxes, and bones of

Foxes; with some Whale-bones. I could not conceiue, to
what purpose they should come thither; for we could finde
none or very little wood on the shoares side, and no fish at all;
though we did dayly indeauour to take some. But it may be,
the season was not yet come. I named this Coue by the Masters
name of my Ship, Prices Coue. The Latitude of it is
61. 24. the Variation. The firebrands and chips which I
spake of, had beene cut with some hatchet or other good instrument
of iron: from the top of the hills, we could see
the Ilands that are on the South shore; and commonly called
Sir Thomas Buttons Iles: They did beare South and by East,
halfe a point Easterly: some 14. or 15 leagues distant vpon the
change day, it flowes here seuen a clocke and a halfe; and the
tyde highest at most three fad. The flood comes from the
Eastwards, and thither it returnes. I haue beene obseruant
from the top of the hills; whence I might descry the great
pieces of Ice, 2. or 3. leagues from the shoare, driue to and
againe with the flood and ebbe indifferently. Hence I collected
that assuredly there is no currant sets in here, but that
it is a meere tyde. Neere the shoare, the eddies whitle into
twenty manners; when the ebbe is made: which is, because it
comes out of the broken ground amongst the Ice that is aground
neere the shoare: Besides which reason, there be diuers
Rockes lying vnder water; on which you shall haue now
30. then 12. and anon but 8. and then 20. fad. And these
vncertainties, occasion such distractions. I would therefore
aduise none to come too neere those dangerous shoares, for
feare hee lose his ship, and so by consequence all: The last
night, we tooke better rest then we had done in tenne nights
before.
         And this morning being the 24.24. there sprung vp a faire
gale of wind at East: and after prayer we vnfastened our Ship,
and came to saile, steering betwixt great pieces of Ice, that
were a-ground in 40. fad. and twice as high as our top-mast
head.
         Wee went forth of this Coue, vpon the flood, and had
none of those whirlings of the waters, as we had at our going

into it. We indeauoured to gaine the North shoare; kept our
selues within a league of the shoare of the Iland of Resolution,
where we had some cleere water to saile thorow. In the
Offing, it was all thicke throngd together, as might be possible.
By 12. a clocke, we were fast inclosed, and notwithstanding
it blew very hard at East, yet we could make no way
through it: but the hard corners of the Ice did grate vs
with that violence, as I verily thought it would haue grated
the plankes from the Ships sides. Thus we continued in torment,
till the day, driuing to and againe in the Ice; not
being able to see an acre of sea from top-mast head. This
26.26. was calme Sun-shine weather; and we tooke the Latitude
& Variation. The Latitude is, the Variation we sounded,
and had ground at 140. fad. small white sand. I caused the
men to lay out some fishing lines; but to no purpose: for I
could not perceiue that baite had beene so much as touched.
The nights are very cold: so that our rigging freezes: and
the fresh ponds of water stand vpon the Ice, aboue halfe an
inch thicke.
         The 27.27. there sprung vp a little gale at South-East: and the
Ice did something open. Hereupon we let fall our foresayle,
and forced the Ship thorow the throng of Ice. In the Euening,
the winde came contrary, at W. N. W. and blew hard:
which caused vs to fasten to a great piece, to which we remained
moord till the 29.
         I am resolued,28. that here is no currant: and that by many
experiments which I haue made. Namely, by taking markes
on the land; and noting our drift to and againe, with the
ebbe and flood, for many dayes together; as well in calme
weather, as otherwayes. By all these experiments I found
exactly, that the tide was no stronger there, then that betwixt
England and France.
         This morning,29. there sprung vp a fine gale at E. and the Ice
did open something, so that we did force the Ship thorow
it with her fore-saile. By 12. a clocke, we were gotten into
some open water, with a fine gale of wind at East, and so
cleere weather, that we could see the Iland of Resolution.

The North end did beare of vs E. N. E. some 12. leagues off.
         From this 29. till the 5. of Iuly,Iuly 5. wee sayled continually
thorow the Ice, with variable winds and fogges, and sometimes
calme. The 5. at noone, we had a good obseruation, and
were in Latitude 63. 15. and then wee saw Salisbury Iland,
bearing W. by N. some 7. leagues off: with much Ice betwixt
it and vs: to weather which, we were driuen to stand
to the Northward. Soone after, we saw Prince Charles his
Cape, and Mill Iland: and to the North-north-west, (and
in deed, round about vs) the Sea most infinitely pestered
with Ice. This did grieue mee very much: for whereas I
had determined to prosecute the discouery to the North-westward,
I saw it was not possible this yeere. Wee were
moreouer driuen back againe with contrary windes; still closed
and pestered with Ice: and with all the perils and dangers,
incident to such aduentures: so that we thought a thousand
times, that the Ship had bin beaten to pieces.
         By the fifteenth day of Iuly,15. we were got betwixt Digges
Iland and Nottinghams Iland: not being able to get more
Northward. There for an houre or two, we had some open
water.
         But before I proceed further, it were not amisse in some
manner to describe the Straight, which begins at the Iland of
Resolution, and ends here at Digges Iland. If you goe downe
into the Bay, the Straight is about 120. leagues long; and
trends W. N. W. and E. S. E. generally. In the entrance, it
is about 15. leagues broad; and then on the Southward side,
is a great Bay. About the middest, it is likewise about 15.
leagues broad: and then the Land opens something wider: so
that betwixt Digges Iland, and Cape Charles, it is about 20.
leagues broad. Betwixt which two stands Salisbury Iland,
and Nottingham Iland. If it be cleere weather, you may see
both the South and the North shoares: ordinarily, the depth
in the middle of the Straight, is 120. faddomes, white sand.
A certaine tyde runnes in it, and no Current: The North
shoare, is the straightest, and the cleerest from Ice too. Alongst
the North shoare, you haue many low small Ilands:

which cannot be seene farre off from the land: and in many
places, the land makes as if it had small sounds into it. The
Maine land on both sides, is indifferent high land. And so
much for discourse may suffice: referring you to the Plot for
the particulars.
         Being now resolued of the impossibilitie to doe any thing
to the North-westward,16. for the reasons aforesaid: I gaue
order to the Master of my Ship to Steere away, W. S. W. to
haue a sight of Mansfeilds Iland; which the next day by
three a clocke in the after-noone, we had: hauing had so much
dangerous foule weather amongst the Ice, that we strooke
more fearefull blowes against it, then we had euer yet done.
This was the first day that wee went to halfe allowance of
bread Flesh dayes: and I ordered things as sparingly as I
could. Two of our men complaine likewise of sickenesse;
but soone afterward recouered. In the euening wee came to
an Anker: and I sent the Boate ashoare to try the tydes.
They brought mee word, that whilest the Boat was ashoare,
it flowed about some three foote: and as wee found by the
Ship, and by the Ice; the water at that time came from the
W. S. W. and that the highest tydes (so farre as they could
perceiue) it had not highed aboue two faddome: They found
that the Saluages had beene vpon it; by certaine fires which
they found, and heapes of stones, Tracks of other beasts,
but Foxes they could not finde. The winde was so contrary,
and the weather so foggie; that wee were faine to spend
some powder to recouer our Boate againe.
         Next morning being the 17.17. the winde came something
fauourable: and wee wayed. The shoare being something
cleere of Ice (though very thicke all to the Offing) wee
stood alongst it S. and S. by W. some 10. leagues. In the
after-noone, the winde came contrary: and we came againe
to an Anker, within a mile of the shoare: for to Sea-boord,
was all thicke Ice, and vnpassable. I went ashoare my selfe,
to be resolued of the tyde, and found whilest I was a shoare,
that it did flow two foote: and at that time the flood came
from the S. W. by W. I doubted it was an halfe tyde; which

afterwards I found to be true. I found where the Saluages
had beene vpon the Iland; but could see little or no drift
wood on the shoare; no beasts on the Iland, nor fishes in the
Sea. It flowes on the change day, about a eleuen a clocke.
We saw some fowle on it: of which we killed one, and returned
aboord. This Iland is very low land; little higher then
a dry sand-banke. It hath Ponds vpon it of fresh water, but
no grasse: and is vtterly barren of all goodnesse.
         The 18. in the morning, the winde came something fauourable;18.
and we weyed and came to Sayle: for the Ice was all
comne about vs. We endeauoured to proceed to the Westward;
intending to fall with the Westerne land, about the
Latitude 63. 00. By twelue a clocke, (hauing beene much
pestered) we were comne to a firme range of Ice: but it
pleased God that the winde larged, and wee stowed away
S. S. W. At noone in Lat. 62. 00. by 4. in the euening (hauing
scaped dangerous blowes) wee were come (as wee
thought) into an open Sea; and ioyfully steered away West,
and W. by N. although that Ioy was soone quayled. By ten
at night, we heard the rut of the Ice: and it grew a thicke
fogge, and very darke with it: neuerthelesse we proceeded,
and the neerer we came to it, the more hideous noyse it made.
         By three in the morning, the 19. we were come to it,19. and
as it did cleere a little, we could see the Ice: which were as
thicke rands of Ice, as any we had yet seene. These being vnpassable,
and moreouer the winde at N. W. we stowed alongst
it, hoping to weather it to the Southward: but at last, we became
so blinded with fogge, and so incompassed with Ice,
that we could goe no further.
         The 20. in the morning (notwithstanding the fogge)20.
we endeauoured to get to the Westward; our Ship beating
and knocking all this while most fearefully.
         In this wilfulnesse we continued till the 21:21. when being
fast amongst the Ice, I obserued we were in Lat. 60. 33. and
then looking what damage our Ship might haue receiued, we
could perceiue that below the plate of Iron, which was before
her Cut-water, shee was all bruised and broken: the two

knees she had before, to strengthen her, spoyled and torne:
and many other defects, which we could not by any meanes
come to mend. Notwithstanding all this, and the extraordinary
thicke fogge (that we could not see a Pistoll shot about
vs) we proceeded with the hazzard of all.
         Till the 27:27. which was the frist time we had cleere weather
to looke about vs: The winde withall came vp at South,
and the Ice did open something: so that we made some way
thorow it to the Westward. In the euening, we were fast
againe, and could goe no further: the winde veering from
the South to the East; and blowing a fresh gale. This occasioned
our griefes the more; that with a good winde, wee
could not goe forward: putting therefore a Hawser vpon a
piece of great Ice, to keepe the Ship close to it, we patiently
expected for better fortune. Since we came from Mansfields
Iland, our depth was commonly 110. and 100. fad. oozye
ground. Now the water begins to showlde: for this present
27. driuing fast to and againe in the Ice, we haue but 80. fad.
ground as before.
         The 28. and 29. we were so fast inclosed in the Ice,28. that
notwithstanding, we put abroad all the sayle that was at yards;
and that it blew a very hard gale of winde; the Ship stirred
no more then if shee had beene in a dry Docke. Hereupon
we went all boldly out vpon the Ice, to sport and recreate our
selues, letting her stand still, vnder all her Sayles. It was flat,
extraordinary large Ice: the worst to deale withall, that we
had yet found. I measured some pieces: which I found to
be 1000. of my paces long. This was the first day that our
men began to murmure: thinking it impossible to get either
forwards or backe-wards. Some were of the opinion, that it
was all such Ice, betwixt vs and the shoare. Others, that the
Bay was all couered ouer: and that it was a doubt whether
we could get any way, or to any land, to winter in. The nights
were long; and euery night it did so freeze, that we could
not sayle amongst the Ice by night, nor in the thicke foggie
weather. I comforted and incouraged them, the best I could:
and to put away these cogitations, wee dranke a health to his

Maiestie on the Ice; not one man in the Ship; and shee still
vnder all her sayles. I most ingeniously confesse, that all their
murmuring was not without reason; wherefore doubting
that we should be frozen vp in the Sea: I ordered that fire
should be made but once a day, and that but with a certaine
number of shides, that the Steward should deliuer to the
Cooke by tale, the better to prolong our fewell whatsoeuer
should happen.
         The 30.30. we made some way thorow the Ice: we heauing
the Ship with our shoulders, and with Mawles and Crowes
of Iron, breaking the corners of the Ice, to make way. As
we got forwards, the water shoalded apace: so that I beleeue
it to be some Iland. At noone we obseru'd thorow the
fogge, with the Quadrant, vpon a piece of Ice: and were in
Lat. 58. 54. our depth 30. fad. We put out hookes, to try
to catch some fish, but to no purpose; for there is not any in
this Bay.
         The 31.31. we laboured as aforesaid: and got something forward.
At noone we were in Lat. 58. 40. our depth 23. fad.
It was very thicke hazye weather; or else I thinke we should
haue seene the land.
         The first of August,August 1. the winde came vp at West; which
droue vs to the Eastward: where our depth increased to 35.
fad. At noone (by obseruation with the Quadrant, on the
Ice) we were in Lat. 58. 45. At sixe a clocke this euening,
we might perceiue the Ice to heaue and set a little: which
was occasioned by a swelling Sea, that came out of the South-West.
This did comfort vs very much: hoping shortly we
should get out of the Ice.
         The second,2. it did blow hard at South-West, and yet we
could not feele the forementioned swelling Sea: which did
againe quench the hopes we had formerly conceiued.
         The third,3. wee did see a little open water to the North-westward;
and did feele a swelling Sea from the West: which
doth assure vs, that there is an open Sea to the Westward.
         The fift,5. we saw the Sea cleere: but could by no meanes
worke our selues to it with our sayles: wherefore about sixe

in the euening, wee let fall an Anker in 50. fad. water; and
stood all with poles and oares to fend off the Ice, and let it
passe to Leewards. We continued this labour all night.
         In the morning,6. the winde came vp at North-West, and
we wayed with much ioy, as hoping now to get into an open
Sea to the Southward. This by noone we had done; and were
in Lat. 58. 28. very free of Ice. The winde did large vpon
vs: so that we stood away North-West, to get vp as high
to the Northward as we could: and so to come coasting to
the Southward. We went to prayer, and to giue God thanks
for our deliuery out of the Ice.
         The ninth,9. (being in Lat. 59. 40.) we came againe to the
Ice, which lye very thicke to the North: since we came out
of the Ice, our depth increased to 110. and now decreaseth againe:
So that I thinke we approched towards the shoare.
         The tenth prooued very thicke foggie weather;10. the winde
contrary, and the water showlding apace, we came to an Anker
in 22. fad.
         The eleuenth in the morning,11. we wayed, and made in for
the shoare; and about noone saw the land: our depth being
16. fad. in Lat. 59. 40. The land to the North of vs, did
trend North by East, and so made a point to the Southward,
and trended away West by South, which we followed: making
it for that place, which was formerly called Hubberts
Hope. And so it prooued indeed: but it is now hopelesse.
         Two or three words now, concerning the Bay that we
haue past ouer. It is from Digges Iland, to this Wester land
(in latitude aforesaid) about 160. leagues, the course West
South West, the variation
         The tydes doe set in the middle of the Bay, East and West,
as we haue often tryed by our ledde aground: but neerer the
shoares, as they are forced by the land; I am of the opinion
that in the Ocean, or in large Bayes, the tydes doe naturally set
East and West, and that this doth giue little hope of a passage.
The greatest depth we had in the Bay, was 110. fad. and so
shoalding, as you approch to land, we coasted round about
this forementioned little Bay; which is some 18. leagues

deepe in 8. and 6. fad. and in the bottome of it, we were in
two faddome and a halfe water, and saw the firme land, almost
round about vs. Then we proceeded to the Southward
sixe and seuen faddome water; within sight of the breach of
the shoare: keeping the lead continually going, and in the
night we would come to an Anker. This night being little
winde, we came to an Anker with our Kedger: but in waying
of him, we lost him, hauing no more aboord vs.
         The 12.12. we were in Lat. 58. 46. some two leagues from
the shoare. The variation is about 17. deg.
         The 13.13. in the afternoone (it being something hazye) we
saw some breaches ahead vs: our depth was 9. and 10. fad.
and luffing to cleere our selues of them, we suddenly strooke
vpon the Rocks: the Ship then being vnder our two Topsayles,
Foresayle and Spreetsayle: with a fresh gale of winde.
In this fearefull accident, wee strooke all our sayles amaine;
and it did please God to send two or three good swelling
Seas, which did heaue vs ouer the Rocks, into 3. fad. and presently
into three faddome and a halfe; where we chopt to an
Anker: and sayed the pumps: but we found shee made no
water, although shee had three such terrible blowes, that we
thought her Mast would haue shiuered to pieces, and that she
had bin assuredly bulged. Wee hoyst the Boate ouer-boord,
and double man'd her: to goe seeke and sound a way, out of
this perilous place. Shee was no sooner gone, but there rose
a fogge; so that we were faine to spend some powder, that
shee might heare whereabouts we were. The winde duld
something; otherwise, it had beene doubtfull whither shee
could euer haue recouered to vs againe. After shee had beene
absent two houres, she brought vs word, that it was all Rocks
and breaches, round about vs: and that withall, shee had
found a way, where there was not lesse then two fad. and a
halfe: and that afterwards, the water did deepen. We did
presently way, and follow the Boate, and past ouer two
ledges of Rocks, on which there was scarce 14. foot water.
Then it did deepen to 3. 4. and so to 14. fad. then it shoulded
againe to 9. It being now night, we came to an Anker: where

we ride indifferent well all the night. In the morning, the
winde came contrary; so that wee could not goe that way
we intended to cleere our selues: and therefore we went to
worke; to fit our holds, to splise our Cables; and made ready
two shot, and so placed them in the Hold, that they might
vpon all occasions runne cleere; the ends of them being fastned
to the maine Mast. We likewise lookt to our Ankers,
and fitted our spare ones. We got out our long Boate from
betwixt the decks; which was very much broken and bruised.
The Carpenter went to worke to fit her, (for I intended
to tow the Shallop at Sterne) and so to haue the Boats
ready at an instant, either to lay out Ankers, or to be seruiceable
to what God should be pleased to try our faith and patience
withall: for in him was our only trust, and our hope
vpon his fauour, in our honest endeauours. At noone, in Lat.
57. 45. wee could see the land from the N. W. to the S. E.
by E. with Rocks and breaches: and the Rocks that we came
ouer, dry aboue water: whereby I knew it flowes here two
faddomes at least. At noone, I sent the Boate off to sownd
to the Eastward: because the water shoulded, when we came
to an Anker. Shee brought vs word, the shouldest water she
had beene in, was 7. fad. We intending thereupon to way,
the winde came Easterly: so that we could not budge: but
lay here the 14. all night,14. with a stiffe gale of winde.
         The 15. in the euening,15. our Cable galded off: by reason of
which perilous and sudden accident, in which wee had not
time to put a Buoy to it, we lost our Anker, and were driuen
into 4. fad. water, before we could set our sayles. This when
we had done, we stowed South South-East, the winde being
at East, but the water shoulded to 3. fad. Then wee stowed
North north-east, and it did deepen by degrees to ten fadd.
and because it grew darke, we came to an Anker, and rid a
good stresse all night.
         In the morning the 16.16. the winde came vp at North a fresh
gale: and we wayed and came to sayle. By nine a clocke, it
grew to be a very storme: and we turned to and againe, in
10. fad. water. In the euening, the winde duld: and wee

stood South-west, to haue a sight of Port Nelson: which
course we stood all night, by the Starres, being in Lat. 57. 25.
the variation, about 17. degrees.
         The 17. in the morning,17. we stood South: and our depth
decreased by degrees to 8. faddomes. At noone we had good
obseruation: being in Latitude 57. 15. and wee make account,
that we are some 6. or 7. leagues of the Southerne side
of Port Nelson. Here the colour of the water changed: and
was of a puddlelish and sandy red colour. We stood into 6.
fad. and could not see the land from Top-mast-head: so night
comming on, and it beginning to blow hard at East by South,
we stood off againe into 10. and 12. faddomes: where the
water was againe of the colour of the Sea.
         The 18. as the winde and weather fauoured vs,18. and the
storme was broken vp: we stood in againe South, and came
againe into thicke puddlelish water: into 8. 7. and 6. fad.
and then off againe: for that it grew thicke foggie weather:
keeping our lead continually going, night and day.
         The 19. being fine cleere Sun-shine weather;19. we stood in
againe into the thicke puddleish water, into 8. fad. where we
came to an Anker, to try the tydes: For that from Top-mast-head,
we could not now see the land. We were at noone (by
good obseruation) in Latitude 57. 20. and the tyde did set
N. W. by W. and S. E. by E. It did runne two knols and a
halfe in two glasses; I resolued, that this was nothing but
shoalds to the land. In the after-noone it began to snuffle and
blow; so that we had much adoe to get vp our Anker. This
being done, we stood East South East: but the water shoalded
apace. Then we stood East, and it deepened a little: In
the euening, the winde came vp at West; and then we stood
East South-east, into 10. and 8. and afterwards South-East,
as our depth did guide vs by our lead, and the colour of the
water into 7. and 6. faddomes.
         The 20.20. at 6. in the morning, we saw the land: it being a
very low flat land. Wee stood into 5. faddomes, to make
it the better: and so stood alongst it. At noone wee were in
lat. 57. 00. We named it, The new Principality of South Wales;

and drank a health in the best liquor we had to Prince Charles
his Highnesse, whom God preserue. We stood alongst it;
and came to a point where it trends to the Southward: neere
to which point, there are two small Ilands. In the euening
it was calme, and we came to an Anker. The tyde set as aforesaid.
There we rid all that night, and the next day: by reason
the winde was contrary. There went a chopping short
Sea: and the Ship did labour at it, exceedingly leaping in
Spreet-sayle yard, Forecastell, and all: for as yet we had not
trimmed her well, to ride. About nine at night, it was very
darke: and it did blow hard. Wee did perceiue by the lead
the Ship did driue, wherefore bringing the Cable to Capstang,
to heaue in our Cable (for we did thinke we had lost
our Anker) the Anker hitcht againe, and vpon the chopping
of a Sea, threw the men from the Capstang. A small rope in
the darke, had gotten foule about the Cable, and about the
Masters legge too: but with helpe of God hee did cleere
himselfe, though not without sore bruising. The two Mates
were hurt; the one in the head; the other in the arme. One
of our lustiest men, was strooken on the brest with a bar, that
he lay sprawling for life: another had his head betwixt the
Cable; and hardly escaped. The rest were flung, where they
were sore bruised: But our Gunner (an honest and a diligent
man) had his legge taken betwixt the Cable and the Capstang:
which wrung off his foote, and tare all the flesh off his
legge, and crushed the bone to pieces, and sorely withall bruised
all his whole body: in which miserable manner hee remained
crying till we had recouered our selues, our memory
and strengths to cleere him. Whilest we were putting him
and the rest downe to the Chirurgion; the Ship droue into
shoalde water; which put vs all in feare: we being so sorely
weakened by this blow, which had hurt eight of our men.
It pleased God, that the Anker held againe: and shee rid it
out all night. By midnight, the Chirurgion had taken off the
Gunners legge at the gartering place; and drest the others that
were hurt and bruised: after which we comforted each other
as well as we could.
         
            
The 22.22. wee weyed; and stood a little off into deeper
water; expecting a better winde. Which in the afternoone
fauoured vs. Wee stood in againe for the shoare, and alongst
it wee proceeded. It is very shoald about foure leagues off,
and full of breaches.
         The 23.23. at noone, we were in latitude 56. 28. In the euening,
the winde came contrary: and we were faine to turne
to and againe. All this moneth, the winde hath beene very
variable, and continued not long vpon one point: yet it happened
so, that we can get but little forward.
         The 26.26. there sprung vp a fine gale at West, but very
thicke weather: neuerthelesse wee stood into 7. and 6. fad.
the water very thicke and puddlelish. At noone, it cleered;
and we could see that we were imbayed in a little Bay: the
land being almost round about vs. We stood out of it, and
so alongst it, in sight; till the 27.27. in the morning: when we
came to higher land then any we had yet seene, since we came
from Nottingham Iland. We stood into it, and came to an
Anker in 5. faddome. I sent off the Boate, well man'd and
arm'd; with order in writing what they were to doe: and
a charge to returne againe, before Sunne-set: The euening
came, and no newes of our Boate: we shot and made false
fires; but had no answer: which did much perplex vs, doubting
that there had some distaster befalne her, through carelesnesse,
and in her we should lose all. Wee aboord, at present,
were not able to wey our Anker, nor sayle the Ship. At last
we saw a fire vpon the shoare; which made vs the more
doubtfull, because they did not answer our shot, nor false fires
with the like. Wee thought withall, that it had beene the
Saluages, who did now triumph in their conquest. At length
they came, all safe and well: and excused themselues, in that
vpon their comming ashoare, it did ebbe so suddenly, that a
banke of sand was so presently dry without them, as they
could not come away, till that was couered againe: and with
that they pacified mee: They reported, that there was great
store of drift wood, on the shoare: and a good quantitie
growing on the land. That they saw the tracks of Deere and

Beares: good store of Fowle; (of which they had killed
some) but no signe of people. That they past ouer two little
riuers, and came to a third; which they could not passe:
That it did flow very neere three faddomes, sometimes; as
appeared by the shoare. That it was low water at foure a
clocke; that the flood came from the North-west: and that
it flowed halfe tyde; which both they and we had perceiued
by the Ship. At low water, we had but three faddome, where
we did ride. The winde began to blow hard at East, whereupon
we weyed and stood to the Northward till midnight:
Then in againe; and in the morning wee saw the land: and
then it began to blow hard, and as we stood off, it increased to
a very storme; so that at length wee could not maintaine a
payre of courses; but tryed vnder our Maine course, all day
and all night: sometime turning her head, to the Landward:
sometime to the Offing.
         The 29.29. in the morning, we made account we had drouen
backe againe, some 16. or 18. leagues: and in the morning
(as it cleered) wee saw a Ship to Leeward of vs some three
or foure leagues: so wee made sayle and bore vp with her.
Shee was then at an Anker in 13. fadd. It was his Maiesties
Ship, and Captaine Foxe commanded in her.
         I saluted him according to the manner of the Sea, and receiued
the like of him. So I stood in to see the land, and
thought to tacke about, and keepe weather of him, and to send
my Boat aboord of him: but the winde shifted, so that for
that time I could not. In the euening, I came to weather of
him, and sent my Boat aboord of him; who presently weighed,
and stood off with mee till midnight: and then we stood
in againe.
         In the morning Captaine Foxe and his friends, came aboord
of mee: where I entertained them in the best manner I could:
and with such fresh meat as I had gotten from the shoare; I
told him, how I had named the land, The South Principality
of Wales. I shewed him how farre I had beene to the Eastward:
where I had landed; and in briefe, I made knowne to
him, all the dangers of this Coast, as farre as I had beene.

He told mee, how himselfe had beene in Port Nelson: and
had made but a Cursory discouery hitherto: and that he had
not beene aland; nor had not many times seene the land. In
the euening, after I had giuen his men some necessaries, with
Tobacco and other things which they wanted: hee departed
aboord his Ship: and the next morning, stood away South
South-west: since which time, I neuer saw him. The winde
something fauouring mee, I stood in for the shoare; and so
proceeded alongst it, in sight.
         This moneth of August ended with Snow and Haile; the
weather being as cold, as at any time I haue felt in England.
         We coasted alongst the shoare in 10.September 1. faddomes, and when
it cleered; in sight of land. At length the water shoalded to
6. and 5. fadd. and as it cleered, we saw it all breaches to Leeward:
so we hull'd off, North North-east, but still raised land.
By night, we had much adoe to get safely out of this dangerous
Bay. At midnight, the winde came vp at South, and so
we tooke in our sayles, and let the Ship driue to the Northward
into deeper water. This day, was the first time, the
Chirurgion told mee, that there were diuers of the men tainted
with sicknesse. At noone, we were in latitude 55. 12.
         The second,2. we stood in againe for the shoare; but as we
came in to shoald water, it began to blow: the weather being
winterly and foule; threatning a storme: wherein we were
not deceiued, for that in standing off, wee had a violent one.
By midnight it broke vp;3. and the third in the morning, wee
stood in againe: and by a 11. wee saw it. Here wee found
the land to trend South South-east and South: so that we
knew, we were at a Cape Land: and named it Cape Henrietta
Maria: by her Maiesties name; Who had before named our
Ship. At noone, we were in latitude 55. 05. and that is the
height of the Cape.
         From Port Nelson to this Cape, the land trends (generally)
East South-east, but makes with points and Bayes: which in
the particulars doth alter it a point, two or three. The distance
is about one hundred and thirtie leagues: the variation
at this Cape taken by Amplitude, is about sixteene degrees.

A most shoald and perilous coast: in which there is not one
Harbour to be found.
         The third day in the afternoone,3. we had a tearing storme at
North; which continued till midnight, in extreme violence.
         The fourth in the morning (the storme being broke vp)
we stood in againe,4. South-West. The weather was very
thicke, and we sounded continually: but by noone it cleered
and we saw the land. Here it did trend South by East, and the
tydes did set alongst it, with a quicke motion. In the euening,
there came a great rowling Sea out of the North North-east,
and by eight a clocke, it blew very hard at South-east, and by
reason of the incounter of the winde and this great Sea: the
Sea was all in a breach; and to make vp a perfect tempest, it
did so lighten, snow, raine, and blow, all the night long, that
I was neuer in the like: We shipt many Seas; but one most
dangerous: which rackt vs fore and aft: that I verily thought
it had sunke the Ship: It strooke her with such a violence. The
Ship did labour most terribly in this distraction of winde and
waues: and we had much adoe to keepe all things fast in the
hold, and betwixt decks.
         The fift in the morning,5. the winde shifted South-West,
but changed not his condition; but continued in his old anger
and fury. In the afternoone, it shifted againe to the North-west,
and there showed his vttermost malice; and in that tearing
violence, that nor I, nor any that were then with mee,
euer saw the Sea in such a breach. Our Ship was so tormented,
and did so labour; with taking it in on both sides, and at both
ends: that we were in a most miserable distresse, in this so
vnknowne a place. At eight a clocke in the euening, the
storme brake vp: and we had some quietnesse in the night
following: not one hauing slept one winke in 30. houres before.
If this storme had continued Easterly, as it was at first,
without Gods goodnesse we had all perished.
         The sixt,6. the winde was at South-west, so that wee could
do no good to the Westward. We spent the time therefore,
in trimming of our Ship: we brought all our coales (which
for the most part was great Coale) aft: as we also did some

other things; and all to lighten her afore. Others did picke
our bread; whereof there was much wet: for doe what we
could, we shipt abundance of water betwixt decks: which
ranne into the hold, and into our bread-roome: for the Sea,
indeed, so continually ouer-rackt vs, that we were like Ionas
in the Whales belly: We ouer-looked our Tacks and Shoots,
with other Riggings of stresse: because that henceforward,
we were to looke for no other but Winter weather: This
euening our Boate-swayne (a painefull man, and one that had
laboured extremely these two or three dayes) was very sicke:
swouning away three or foure times: insomuch that wee
thought verily, he would presently haue dyed.
         The seuenth in the morning,8. the winde came vp at South-east,
and we stood away South-west, vnder all the sayle we
could make. In this course, we saw an Iland and came close
aboord it: and had twentie fadd. water, which was some comfort
to vs: for hitherto, we could not come within foure or
fiue leagues of the shoare, at that depth. This Iland stands
in 54. 10. The afternoone, we stood away South-west, and
in the euening, had the shoalding of the Westerne shoare, in
10. 8. and 7. fadd. but it was so thicke, that we could not see
the land. It is about 14. leagues, betwixt this Iland and the
Maine.
         The eight was thicke,9. foggie, and calme: which so continued
till the ninth about sixe in the morning. The winde then
comming vp at South South-west: (though very foggy) we
stood to the Eastward: keeping our lead going continually.
In the euening, the water shoalded to 10. and 9. fadd: wherefore
we stood off and on, all night.
         The tenth we made it: finding it an Iland,10. of about 8. or
9. leagues long. It stands in latitude 53. 5. and about 15.
leagues from the Westerne shoare. The part of it, that we
coasted, trends West North-west: I named it my Lord Westons
Iland; We stood still away to the Eastward: it being
broken foggie weather. In the afternoone, we discryed land
to the Eastward of vs: which made like three hils, or hummockes:
Towards them we sayle; keeping our lead still going:

and very circumspect. At length wee also saw land to the
Southward of vs: whereupon we loofe vp, and now make
for that: by course as we had set it in the thicke darke fogge.
We came in amongst such low broken grounds, breaches, and
rockes; that we knew not which way to turne vs: but God
be thanked it was but little winde; and so we came to an Anker;
Soone after it cleered; at which time we could see nothing
but sands, rocks, and breaches, round about vs: that
way onely excepted, which we came in. I sent presently the
Boate to sound amongst the shoalds and rocks: that if wee
should be put to extremitie, we might haue some knowledge
which way to goe. This night prooued calme and faire weather:
and we rid quietly.
         The eleuenth in the morning,11. I went in the Boate ashoare
my selfe: and whilst I was a land, I sent the Boate about amongst
the broken grounds, to sound. I found this Iland, vtterly
barren of all goodnesse: yea of that which I thought
easily to haue found: which was Scuruy-grasse, Sorrell, or
some herbe or other, to haue refreshed our sicke people. I
could not perceiue that the tyde did flow here (ordinarily) aboue
two foot. There was much drift wood on the shore: and
some of it droue vp very high, on the North side of the Iland:
whereby I iudged that the stormes were very great at
North, in the Winter. Thus I returned aboord; and sent many
of our sicke men to another part of the Iland, to see if
they themselues could fortunately finde any reliefe for their
griefes. At noone, by good obseruation, we were in latitude
52. 45. In the euening, our men returned comfortlesse: and
then we weyed and stood to the Westward, comming to an
Anker vnder another Iland, in 20. faddomes.
         The twelfth in the morning,12. it began to blow hard at
South-east, which was partly of the shoare; and the Ship began
to driue: it being soft oozie ground. We heaued in our
Anker thereupon, and came to sayle vnder two courses.
Whilest the most were busie in heauing out of Top-sayles:
some, that should haue had speciall care of the Ship ranne her
ashoare vpon the rocks: out of meere carelesnesse, in looking

out and about or heaving of the leade, after they had seene
the land all night long, and mought euen then haue seene it, if
they had not been blinded with selfe conceit, and beene enuiously
opposite in opinions. The first blow, stroke me out of
a dead sleepe, and I running out of my Cabbin; thought no
other at first, but I had beene wakened (when I saw our danger)
to prouide my selfe for another World.
         After I had contrould a little passion in my selfe, and had
checkt some bad counsell that was giuen me, to reuenge my
selfe vpon those that had committed this error: I ordered
what should be done to get off these Rockes and stones.
First we halde all our sayle abacke-slayles; but that did no
good, but make her beate the harder. Whereupon we strooke
all our sayles amaine; and furdeld them vp close, tearing
downe our sterne, to bring the Cable thorow the Cabbin to
Capstang: and so laid out an Anker to heaue her asterne. I
made all the water in hold to be stau'd: and set some to the
pumpes to pumpe it out, and did intend to doe the like with
our Beere; Others I put to throw out all our Coales: which
was soone and readily done. We quoyld out our Cables into
our long boate; all this while, the Ship beating so fearefully,
that we saw some of the sheathing swim by vs. Then stood
we, as many as we could, to the Capstang: and heaued with
such a good will, that the Cable brake, and we lost our Anker.
Out, with all speede, therefore, we put another: Wee
could not now perceiue whether she did leake or no; and
that by reason we were imployed in pumping out the water,
which we had bulged in hold: though we much doubted,
that she had receiued her deaths wound: wherefore we put
into the Boate the Carpenters tooles, a barrell of bread, a
barrell of powder, sixe muskets, with some match; and a tinder-boxe,
fish, hookes and lines, pitch and okum: and to be
breefe, what-euer could be thought on in such an extremity.
All this we sent ashoare, to prolong a miserable life for a
few dayes. We were fiue houres thus beating; in which
time she strooke 100. blowes: insomuch that we thought
euery stroke had bin the last that it was possible she could

haue endured. The water, we could not perceiue in all this
time, to flowe any thing at all: at length, it pleased God, she
beat ouer all the Rockes: though yet wee knew not whether
she were stanch. Whereupon, to pumping we goe on
all hands, till we made the pumpes sucke: and then we saw
how much water she did make in a glasse. VVe found her
to be very leakie; but wee went to prayer and gaue God
thankes it was no worse: and so fitted all things againe, and
got further off and came to an Anker. In the Euening, it began
to blow very hard at W. S. W. which if it had done
whilest we were on the Rockes, we had lost our Ship without
any redemption. With much adoe, we wayde our Anker,
and let her driue to the Eastward amongst the broken grounds
and Rockes: the boate going before, sounding. At length,
we came amongst breaches; and the boate made signes to vs
that there was no going further. Amongst the Rockes therefore
we againe came to an Anker, where we did ride all night:
and where our men which were tyred out with extreme labour,
were indifferent well refreshed. Here I first noted,
that when the wind was at S. it flowed very little or no water
at all; so that we could not bring our Ship aground to
looke to her: for we did pumpe almost continually.
         The 13. at noone we wayed,13. and stood to the Westward:
but in that course, it was all broken grounds, shoaldes and
sunken Rockes: so that we wondered with our selues, how
we came in amongst them in a thicke fogge. Then we shapte
our course to the North-ward: and after some consultation
with my associates, I resolued to get about this land, and so
to goe downe into the bottome of Hudsons Baye; and see if
I could discouer a way into the Riuer of Canada: and if
I failed of that, then to winter on the maine Land; where
there is more comfort to be expected, then among Rockes
or Ilands. We stood alongst the shoare, in sight of many
breaches. When it was night, we stood vnder our fore-sayle;
the leade still going. At last, the water shoalded vpon vs, to
10. fad. and it began to blow hard. We tackte about, and it
did deepen to 12. and 14. fad. but by and by, it shoalded againe

to 8. fad. Then we tackt about againe; and suddenly it shoalded
to 6. and 5. fad. so wee strooke our sayle amaine, and
chopt to an anker: resoluing to ride it out for life and death.
We ridde all night a great stresse; so that our bittes did rise,
and we thought they would haue beene torne to pieces.
         At breake of day the 14.14. we were ioyfull men: and when
we could looke about, we discried an Iland some 2. leagues
off, at W. by N. and this was the shoald that lay about it.
Here did runne a distracted, but yet a very quicke Tyde: of
which we taking the opportunity, got vp our Anker, and
stood N. W. to cleere our selues of this shoald. In the afternoone,
the wind came vp at N. E. and we stood alongst the
Easterne shoare in sight of a multitude of breaches. In the
Euening, it began to blow a storme not sayle-worthy; and the
sea went very high, and was all in a breach. Our shallop,
which we did now towe at sterne, being moord with two
hawsers, was sunken: and did spine by her moorings, with
her keele vp, 20. times in an houre. This made our ship to
hull very broad; so that the sea did continually ouer-rake vs:
yet we indured it, and thought to recouer her. All night, the
storme continued with violence, and with some raine in the
morning: it then being very thicke weather. The water
shoalded apace; with such an ouer-growne sea withall, that
a sayle was not to be endured: and what was as ill, there was
no trusting to an Anker. Now therefore began we to prepare
our selues, how to make a good end, of a miserable tormented
life. About noone as it cleered vp, we saw two Ilands
vnder our lee; whereupon we bare vp to them: and seeing an
opening betwixt them, we indeauoured to get into it before
night: for that there was no hope of vs, if we continued out
at sea, that night. Therefore come life, come death, we
must runne this hazzard. We found it to be a good sound:
where we ridde all night safely, and recouered our strengths
againe, which were much impared with continuall labour.
But before we could get into this good place, our shallop
broke away (being moord with 2. hawsers) and we lost her
to our great griefe: Thus now had we but the Ship boate,

and she was all torne and bruised too. This Iland was the
same that we had formerly coasted the Wester side of;
and had named my Lord Westons Iland. Here we remained
till the 19. in which time it did nothing but snow and blow
extremely, insomuch that we durst not put our boate ouerboord.
         This 19.19. The wind shifted N. N. E. and we wayde and
stood to the Southward: but by noone the wind came vp at
S. and so we came to an Anker vnder another Iland, on
which I went ashoare, and named it The Earle of Bristols
Iland. The Carpenter wrought hard in repairing our boate:
whilest I wandered vp and downe on this desart Iland, I
could not perceiue, that euer there had beene any Saluages on
it: and in breefe, we could finde neither Fish, Fowle, nor
Hearbe vpon it; so that I returned comfortlesse aboord againe.
The tydes doe high about some 6. Foot: now that the wind
is Northerly. The flood comes from the North: and it doth
flow halfe tyde; The full sea this day, was at one a clocke.
Here, seeing the windes continue so Northerly, that we could
not get about to goe into Hudsons Baye; we considered againe
what was best to doe, to looke out for a wintering
place. Some aduised me to goe for Port Nelson: because we
were certaine that there was a Coue, where we might bring
in our Ship. I likte not that counsell; for that it is a most perilous
place, and that it might be so long ere we could get
thither, that we might be debard by the Ice. Moreouer, seeing
it was so cold here, as that euery night our rigging did
freeze: and that sometimes in the Morning, we did shouell
away the snow halfe a foote thicke off our deckes: and in
that Latitude too: I thought it farre worse in the other place.
I resolued thereupon, to stand againe to the Southward, there
to looke for some little Creeke or Coue for our Ship.
         The 21.21. the winde came vp at N. and we wayde: although
it was a very thicke fogge, and stood away S. W. to cleere
our selues of the shoalds that were on the point of this Iland.
This Iland is in Lat. 53. 10. When we were cleere, we steerd
away S. At noone the fogge turned into raine: but very

thicke weather; and it did thunder all the afternoone: which
made vs doubt a storme: for all which, wee aduentured to
proceed. In the euening, the winde increased; and blew hard:
wherefore we tooke in all our sayles, and let her driue to the
Southward, heauing the lead euery glasse. Our depth, when
we tooke in our sayles, was 30. fadd. and it did increase to
45??? which was a great comfort to vs in the darke: At midnight,
our depth began suddenly to decrease; and as fast as
the lead could be heaued, it shoalded to 20. fadd. wherefore
we chopt to an Anker and trimmed our Ship aft, to mount on
the Sea, and fitted all things to ride it out. There was no need
to bid our men watch; not one of them put his eyes together
all the night long. We rid it out well all the night: although
the Sea went very loftie: and that it did blow very hard.
         The 22. in the morning, when we could looke about vs;
we saw an Iland vnder our Lee some league off:22. all being
shoalds and breaches, betwixt vs and it. At noone (with the
helpe of the windward tyde) we attempted to haue vp our
Anker: although the Sea still went very loftie??? Ioyning all
our strengths therefore, with our best skils; God be thanked,
we had it vp: but before we could set our sayles, wee were
driuen into nine fadd. Indeauouring thereupon to double a
point, to get vnder the Lee of this Iland; the water shoalded
to 7. 6. and 5. fadd. but when we were about, it did deepen
againe and we come to an Anker in a very good place; And
it was very good for vs, that we did: for the winde increased
to a very storme. Here wee rid well all the night, tooke good
rest, and recouered our spent strengths againe. The last night
and this morning, it did snow and hayle, and was very cold:
neuerthelesse I tooke the Boate and went ashoare to looke
for some Creeke or Coue to haue in our Ship; for shee was
very leaky: and the company becomne sickly and weake, with
much pumping and extreme labour. This Iland when wee
came to the shoare; it was nothing but ledges of rocks, and
bankes of sand: and there went a very great surfe on them.
Neuerthelesse I made them rowe thorow it; and ashoare I
got with two more, and made them rowe off without the

breaches; and there to come to an Anker and to stay for mee:
I made what speed I could to the top of a hill, to discouer about:
but could not see what we looked for: Thus because
it began to blow hard, I made haste towards the Boate againe.
I found that it had ebbed so low, that the Boate could not by
any meanes come neere the shoare for mee: so that we were
faine to wade thorow the surfe and breaches to her: in which,
some tooke such a cold, that they did complaine of it to their
dying day. But now it began to blow hard, so that we could
not get but little to windward toward our Ship: for the wind
was shifted since we went ashoare, & return to the shoare, we
could not, by reason of the surfe. Well: we row for life, they in
the Ship, let out a Buoy by a long warpe; & by Gods assistanc??
we got to it: and so haled vp to the Ship; where we were well
welcom'd, & we all reioyc'd together. This was a premonition
to vs; to be carefull how we sent off the Boate; for that it was
winter weather already. I named this Iland, Sir Thomas Roes
Iland: It is full of small wood; but in other benefits not very
rich: and stands in latitude 52. 10. At noone, we weyed:
seeing an Iland that bare South South-east of vs, some foure
leagues off; which was the highest land we had yet seene in
this Bay: but as we came neere it, it suddenly shoalded to 6.
5. and 4. fadd. Wherefore we strooke our sayles amaine, and
chopt to an Anker: but it was very foule ground, and when
the Ship was winded vp, we had but three fadd. at her Sterne.
As it cleered, we could see the breaches all alongst vnder our
Lee: holding it safe therefore to stay long here; we settled
euery thing in order, for the Ship to fall the right way. We
had vp our Anker, got into deeper water; and stood ouer againe
for Sir Thomas Roes Iland: which by night we brought
in the winde of vs; some two leagues off: which did well
shelter vs. The tydes runne very quicke here amongst these
shoalds; and their times of running ebbe, or flood, be very
vncertaine: Their currants, are likewise so distracted, that in
the night there is no sayling by the Compasse: wherefore we
were faine to seeke euery night some new place of securitie
to come to an Anker.
         
            
The 24.24. in the morning, it did lower, and threaten a storme:
which made vs with the windward tyde, wey to get neerer
vnder the Iland. It was very thicke foggie weather: and as
we stood to the North-eastward, we came to very vncertaine
depths: at one cast, 20. fadd. the next 7. then 10. 5. 8. and 3.
and comming to the other tacke, we were worse then we
were before, the Currants making a foole of our best iudgements,
in the thicke fogge when we could see no land-marks.
It pleased God, that we got cleere of them: and endeauoured
to get vnder the Lee of the Iland. This being not able to
doe, wee were faine to come to an Anker in 35. fadd. some
two leagues off the shoare: All this afternoone (and indeed
all night too) it did snow and hayle: and was very cold.
         The 25.25 wee weyed, and thought to get to the Eastward:
but as wee tackt to and againe, the winde shifted so in our
teeths, that it put vs within a quarter of a mile of the very
shoare: where we chopt to an Anker and rid it out for life
and death. Such miseries as these, we indured amongst these
shoalds and broken grounds: or rather more desperate then
I haue related: (very vnpleasant perchance to be read) with
snow, haile, and stormy weather, and colder then euer I felt it
in England in my life. Our shoote-Anker was downe twice
or thrice a day: which extreme paines made a great part of
the company sickly. All this lasted with vs, vntill the 30. of
this moneth of September: which we thought would haue
put an end to our miseries: for now we were driuen amongst
rocks, shoalds, ouer-falles, and breaches round about vs; that
which way to turne, we knew not; but there ride amongst
them, in extremitie of distresse. All these perils, made a most
hideous and terrible noyse, in the night season: and I hope it
will not be accounted ridiculous, if I relate with what meditations
I was affected, now and then, amongst my ordinary
prayers: which I here affoord the Reader, as I there conceiued
them; in these few ragged and teared Rimes.
         
            
OH, my poore soule, why doest thou grieue to see
         So many Deaths muster to murther mee?
         Looke to thy selfe, regard not mee; for I
         Must doe (for what I came) performe, or die.
         So thou mayst free thy selfe from being in
         A dung-hill dungeon; A meere sinke of sinne,
         And happily be free'd, if thou beleeue,
         Truly in God through Christ, and euer liue.
         Be therefore glad yet: ere thou goe from hence,
         For our ioynt sinnes, let's doe some penitence,
         Vnfainedly together. When we part,
         Ile wish the Angels Ioy, with all my heart.
         We haue with confidence relyde vpon
         A rustie wyre, toucht with a little Stone,
         Incompast round with paper, and alasse
         To house it harmelesse, nothing but a glasse,
         And thought to shun a thousand dangers, by
         The blind direction of this senselesse flye.
         When the fierce winds shatter'd blacke nights asunder,
         Whose pitchie clouds, spitting forth fire and thunder,
         Hath shooke the earth, and made the Ocean roare;
         And runne to hide it, in the broken shoare:
         Now thou must Steere by faith; a better guide,
         'Twill bring thee safe to heauen against the tyde
         Of Satans malice. Now let quiet gales
         Of sauing grace, inspire thy zealous sayles.
         
            
The first of October was indifferent faire weather;October 1. and
with a windward tyde, out went our Boate, to sound a channell
to help vs out of this perilous place. The Boat, within two
houres shee returned: and told vs, how shee had beene away
where there was not lesse then 12. fadd. We presently, thereupon
weyed; but found it otherwise: and came amongst
many strange races, and ouer-falles, vpon which there went
a very great and breaking Sea: As we proceeded, the water
shoalded to 6. fadd. Well! there was no remedy, we must
goe forward: happy be luckie; seeing there neither was any
riding; and as little hope to turne any way with a sayle, but
that there appeared present death in it. It pleased God so to
direct vs, that we got thorow it: hauing no less then fiue seuerall,
and all very vncertaine depths. The water, sometimes
deepened to 20. fadd. then vpon a sudden, it shoalded to 7. 6.
and 5. faddomes: so we strooke all our sayles amaine, and
chopt to an Anker, where wee rid till midnight, for life and
death: it blowing a mercilesse gale of winde, and the Sea going
very loftie, and all in a breach. The ground was foule
ground too, insomuch that wee doubted our Cable, euery
minute.
         The second in the morning was little winde:2. wherefore
taking the opportunitie of the tyde, the Boate went forth to
sound: which returning againe in two houres, told vs how
they had sounded about that shoald, and had found a place of
some safetie to ride in; and had beene in no lesse water then
fiue faddome. We weyed; and found our Cable galled in two
places: which had soone failed vs, if the foule weather had
continued. We stood the same way, that the Boat did direct
vs: but it prooued so calme, that wee came to an Anker in
18. faddome. I tooke the Boate, and went ashoare on an Iland,
that was to the Southward of vs: which I named, The
Earle of Danbyes Iland: From the highest place in it, I could
see it all broken grounds and shoalds, to the Southward: and
rather worse, then any thing better, then that which we had
beene in??? I found that the Saluages had beene vpon it: and
that it was full of wood. I made haste to the Boate to sound

the Baye for feare of shoalds and sunken Rockes: but found
it indifferent good. Toward the Euening, it began to blow
hard: wherefore we made towards the Ship. She put forth
a Buoy and a warpe; and we rowing for life to recouer her,
were put to Lee-ward of her: but by getting hold of the
warpe, we halde vp to her. The boate we left halfe full of water:
our selues being as wet as drown'd rats; and it made vs
the more reioyce, that we had escapt this great danger. All
night, we had a very hard rode-steede; it blowing a most
violent gale of wind, with snow and haile.
         The third about noone,3. the wind duld; and we had vp
our Anker, standing in further into the Baye into foure fad.
and a halfe water. Here we came againe to an Anker, with
our second Anker: for many of our men are now sicke; and
the rest so weakened, that we can hardly way our shoote-Anchor;
I tooke the Boate, and went presently ashoare to see
what comfort I could find; This was the first time, that I put
foote on this Iland; which was the same that we did after
winter vpon. I found the tracks of Deere, and saw some
Fowle: but that that did reioyce me most, was, that I did
see an opening into the Land, as if it had beene a riuer. To it
we make with all speede, but found it to be barr'd; and not
2. foote water at full sea on the Barre: and yet within, a
most excellent fine Harbour, hauing 4. fad. water. In the
Euening I return'd aboord, bringing little comfort for our
sicke men, more then hopes.
         The 4.4. it did snow and blow very hard; yet I got ashoare,
and appointed the boate to goe to another place, (which made
like a Riuer) and to sound it. In the meane time, I went with
foure more, some 4. or 5. miles vp into the Countrey; but
could find no releefe all that way for our sicke, but a few Berries
onely. After we had well wearied our selues in the troublesome
woods, wee return'd to the place I had appointed
the boate to tarry for me: where at my comming I still found
her, she hauing not beene where I had ordered her, for it had
blowne such a fierce gale of wind, that she could not row to
wind-ward. Thus we return'd aboord, with no good newes.

It continued foule weather, with snow and haile, and extreme
cold; till the 6. when with a fauouring winde, we stood in
neerer to the shoare, and here moord the ship.
         The 7.7. it snow'd all day; so that we were faine to cleare it
of the Decks with shouels; and it blew a very storme withall.
It continued snowing and very cold weather, and it did
so freeze, that all the bowes of the Ship, with her beake-head,
was all Ice: about the Cable also, was Ice as bigge as a mans
middle. The bowes of the boate were likewise frozen halfe a
foote thicke, so that we were faine to hew and beate it off.
The Sunne did shine very cleere; and we tore the top-sayles
out of the tops, which were hard frozen in them, into a
lumpe: so that there they hung a Sunning all day, in a very
lumpe; the Sunne not hauing power to thawe one drop of
them. After the Boate was fitted, we rowed towards the
shoare: but could not come neere the place where we were
vsed to land, for that it was all thickned water with the
snow, that had fallen vpon the sands, that are dry at low
water. This made it so difficult to row, that we could not
set through it with 4. oares: yet something higher to the
West-ward, we got ashoare. Seeing now the winter to
come thus extremely on vpon vs, and that we had very little
wood aboord; I made them fill the boate, and went aboord
and sent the Carpenter and others to cut wood; others
to carry it to the water side: whilest the boate brought it
aboord, for I doubted that we were likely to be debar'd the
shoare, and that we should not goe to and againe with the
boate. It was miserable and cold already aboord the Ship:
euery thing did freeze in the Hold, and by the fire side: Seeing
therefore that we could no longer make vse of our sayles
(which be the wings of a Ship) it raised a many of doubts
in our mindes, that here we must stay and winter. After
we had brought so much wood aboord, as we could conueniently
stowe, and enough as I thought would haue lasted
2. or 3. moneths: The sicke men desired that some little
house or houell might be built a shoare, whereby they might
be the better sheltered, and recouer their healths. I tooke

the Carpenter (and others whom I thought fit for such a purpose)
and choosing out a place, they went immediately to
worke vpon it. In the meane space, I my selfe accompanied
with some others, wandered vp and downe in the Woods,
to see if we could discouer any signes of Salvages, that so
we might the better prouide for our safeties, against them.
We found no appearance that there was any on this Iland???
nor neere vnto it: The snow by this time was halfe legge
high; and stalking through it, we returned comfortlesse to
our Companions: who had all this time wrought well vpon
our house. They aboord the Ship, tooke downe our top-sayles
in the meane while, and made a great fire vpon the
hearth in the hatch way; so that hauing well thaw'd them,
they folded them vp, and put them betwixt deckes,
that if we had any weather, they might bring them againe
to yard: Thus in the Euening we returned aboord.
         The 12.12. we tooke our maine sayle from the yard which
was hard frozen to it: and carryed it ashoare, to couer our
house withall: being first faine to thawe it by a great fire;
By night they had couered it; and had almost hedged it about:
and the sixe builders did desire to lye in it ashoare that
night, which I condiscended vnto: hauing first fitted them
with Muskets and other furniture; and a charge to keepe
good watch all night. Moreouer they had a shoare 2. Grey-hounds
(a dogge and a bitch) which I had brought out of
England, to kill vs some Deere, if happily we could finde
any.
         By the 13.13. at night, our house was ready; and our sixe
builders desired they might trauell vp into the Country to see
what they could discouer.
         The 14.14. betimes in the morning, being fitted with munition,
and their order to keepe together (but especially to seeke
out some Creeke or Cove for our Ship) they departed. We
aboord, tooke downe our two top-masts and their rigging:
making account if we did remooue, to make vse of our foresayle
and mizzen.
         The 15.15. in, the Euening our hunters returned very weary,

and brought with them a small, leaue Deere, in 4. quarters:
which reioyced vs all, hoping we should haue had more of
them, to refresh our sicke men withall. They reported, that
they had wandered aboue 20. miles, and had brought this
Deere aboue 12. mile: and that they had seene 9. or 10. more:
The last night, they had a very cold lodging in the woods;
and so it appeard, for they lookt all almost starued, nor could
they recouer themselues in 3. or 4. dayes after. They saw no
signe of Salvages, nor of any rauening wild beasts, nor yet any
hope of harbour.
         The 17.17. my Lieutenant and 5. more, desired they might
try their fortunes in trauelling about the Iland. But they had
farre worse lucke then the others, although they endured out
all night, and had wandered very farre in the snow (which
was now very deepe) and returned comfortlesse and miserably
disabled with the coldnesse. But what was worse then all
this, they had lost one of their company, Iohn Barton, namely
our Gunners mate; who being very weary, meerly to saue
the going about, had attempted to goe ouer a pond that was
a quarter of a mile over; where when he was in the very
middest, the Ice brake and closed vpon him, and we neuer
saw him more. Considering these disasters, I resolued to fish
no more with a golden hooke: for feare, I weakned my
selfe more with one hunting, then 20. such deare Deeres
could doe me good. Being now assured, that there was no
Salvages vpon the Iland, nor yet about vs on the other Ilands:
no nor on the maine neither, as farre as we could discouer,
(which we further proued by making of fires) and that the
cold season was now in that extremity, that they could not
come to vs, if there were any: we comforted and refreshed
our selues, by sleeping the more securely. We changed our
Iland garrison, euery weeke; and for other refreshing we
were like to haue none till the Spring.
         From this 10. to the 29. it did (by interims) snow and
blow so hard, that the boate could hardly aduenture ashoare,
and but seldome land, vnlesse the men did wade in the thicke
congealed water, carrying one another. We did sensibly perceiue

withall, how wee did daily sinke into more miseries.
The land was all deepe couered with snow; the cold did
multiply; and the thicke snow water did increase: and what
would become of vs, our most mercifull God and preseruer
knew onely.
         The 29.29. I obserued an Eclipse of the Moone, with what care
possibly I could both in the tryall of the exactnesse of our
instruments, as also in the obseruation: I referre you to the
obseruation in the latter end of this Relation: where it is at
large described. This moneth of October ended with snow
and bitter cold weather.
         The first of November I cast vp accounts with the Steward
concerning our victuall:November 1. the third part of our time being
this day out. I found him an honest man: for he gaue me
an account euery weeke what was spent; and what was still
in the hold remaining vnder his hand: I would take no excuse
of leakage or other waste; vnlesse he did daily show it
me. Euery month, I made a new suruey; and euery sixe
moneths, put what we had spared, by it selfe: which now
was at least a moneths prouision of Bread; and a fortnights of
Pease and Fish, &c.
         The 3.3. day the boate indeauoured to get ashoare; but could
not set thorow the thicke congealed water.
         The 4.4. they found a place to get ashoare; and so once in
2. or 3. dayes, till the 9. bringing Beere to our men ashoare
in a barrell, which would freeze firmely in the house in one
night. Other prouision they had store. The Ice Beere being
thaw'd in a kettell, was not good: and they did breake the
Ice of the pondes of water, to come by water to drinke.
This pond-water had a most lothsome smell with it: so that
doubting lest it might be infectious, I caused a Well to be
sunke neere the house. There we had very good water: which
did taste (as we flattered our selues with it) euen like
milke.
         The 10.10. (hauing store of boordes for such a purpose) I put
the Carpenter to worke, to make vs a little boate which we
might carry (if occasion were) ouer the Ice and make vse of

her, where there was water. At noone I tooke the Latitude
of this Iland, by 2. Quadrants: which I found to be 52.
00. I vrged the men to make traps to catch Foxes: for we
did daily see many. Some of them were pied, blacke and
white: whereby I gathered that there was some blacke
Foxes; whose skinnes, I told them, were of a great value:
and I promised, that whosoeuer could take one of them,
should haue the skinne for his reward: Hereupon, they made
diuers traps: and waded in the snow (which was very deepe)
to place them in the woods.
         The 12.12. our house tooke a fire, but we soone quenched
it: We were faine to keepe an extraordinary fire, night and
day: and this accident, made me order a watch to looke to
it continually: seeing, that if our house and clothing should
be burnt, that all we were but in a woefull condition. I lay
ashoare, till the 17. all which time, our miseries did increase.
It did snow and freeze most extremely. At which time, we
looking from the shoare towards the Ship, she did looke
like a piece of Ice, in the fashion of a Ship: or a Ship resembling
a piece of Ice. The snow was all frozen about her;
and all her fore-part firme Ice: and so was she on both sides
also. Our Cables froze in the hawse, wonderfull to behold.
I got me aboord: where the long nights I spent, with tormenting
cogitations: and in the day time, I could not see
any hope of sauing the Ship. This I was assured of, that it
was most impossible to endure these extremities long. Euery
day the men must beare the Ice off the Cables: while
some within boord; with the Carpenters long Calking
Iron, did digge the Ice out of the hawses: in which worke,
the water would freeze on their clothes and hands,
and would so benumme them, that they could hardly get into
the Ship, without being heau'd in with a rope.
         The 19.19. our Gunner (who as you may remember, had his
legge cut off) did languish vnrecouerably: and now grew
very weake: desiring, that for the little time he had to liue,
hee might drinke Sacke altogether, which I ordered hee
should doe.
         
            
The 22.22. in the morning he dyed. An honest and a stronghearted
man. Hee had a close-boorded Cabbin in the Gunroome;
which was very close indeed: and as many clothes
on him, as was conuenient (for we wanted no clothes:) and
a panne with coales, a fire continually in his Cabbin. For all
which warmth, his playster would freeze at his wound, and
his bottle of Sacke at his head. We committed him at a good
distance from the Ship vnto the Sea.
         The three and twentieth,23. the Ice did increase extraordinarily:
and the snow lay on the water in flakes, as it did fall,
much Ice withall droue by vs: yet nothing hard all this
while. In the euening after the watch was set, a great piece
came athwart our hawse; and foure more followed after him:
the least of them a quarter of a mile broad: which in the
darke did very much astonish vs, thinking it would haue carried
vs out of the Harbour, vpon the shoalds Easter point,
which was full of rocks. It was newly congealed, a matter
of two inches thicke: and wee broke thorow it, the Cable
and Anker induring an incredible stresse, sometimes stopping
the whole Ice. We shot off three Muskets, signifying to our
men ashoare, that we were in distresse: who answered vs againe,
but could not helpe vs. By ten a clocke, it was all past;
neuerthelesse wee watched carefully: and the weather was
warmer then wee had felt it any time this moneth. In the
morning at breake of day, I sent for our men aboord, who
made vp the house, and arriued by 10. being driuen by the
way, to wade thorow the congealed water; so that they recouered
to the Boate, with difficultie. There droue by the
Ship many pieces of Ice, though not so large as the former,
yet much thicker: One piece came foule of the Cable, and
made the Ship driue.
         As soone as we were cleere of it, we ioyned our strengths
together, and had vp our Eastermost Anker: and now I resolued
to bring the Ship aground: for no Cables nor Ankers
could hold her: But I will here show you the reasons, why I
brough her no sooner aground. First, it was all stony ground:
some stones lying dry, three or foure foot aboue water: so

that it was to be suspected, that it was the like all about vs.
Secondly, it did ordinarily flow but two foot and a halfe
here; and if shee should bed deepe in the sands, we could not
euer come to digge her out againe: for that shee would not
be dry, by foure or fiue foot. Thirdly, it was a loose sand
which might rise with the surfe, or so mount about her: that
all our weake powers could not heaue it away in the next
spring time. Fourthly, we doubted the tydes would not high
so much in the summer, as they did now. Fifthly, we could
not bring her out of the tydes way; which doth runne something
quicke here: and the Ice, besides, might driue and mount
vp vpon her, and so ouerset her, or teare her, and carry away
her plankes, iron works and all: so that we should haue nothing
left to finish our Pinnasse with. Sixtly, if it did blow a
storme at North-west, or thereabouts; the water would flow
ten foot, and vpwards: and that winde being of the shoare,
it would blow away all the Ice, and there would come in an
extraordinary great surfe about the shoald Ester-point; which
was occasioned by a deepe ouerfall. Moreouer, shee would
beate extremely: and if shee were put vp by the Sea or that
surfe, it was very doubtfull that we should neuer haue her off
againe. For these reasons we endured all the extremitie: still
hoping vpon some good and fortunate accident. But now all
our prouident designs we saw to become foolishnesse; and
that a great deale of miserable labour had beene spent in vaine
by vs. With the flood wee weyed our Westermost Anker,
perceiuing Gods assistance manifestly: because it happened
to be fine warme weather, otherwise we had not beene able
to worke. The winde was now South: which blew in vpon
the shoare; and made the lowest tydes. We brought the Ship
into 12. foot water: and layd out one Anker in the Offing, and
another in shoald water, to draw her aland at command. Our
hope also was, that some stones that were to the Westward
of vs, would fend off some of the Ice. We then being about
a mile from the shoare, about ten a clocke in the darke night,
the Ice came driuing vpon vs; and our Ankers came home. She
droue some two Cables length: and the winde blowing on

the shoare, by two a clock she came aground; and stopt much
Ice: yet shee lay well all night, and we tooke some rest.
         The fiue and twentieth,25. the winde shifted Easterly: and
put abundance of Ice on vs. When the flood was made, we
incouraged one another, and to worke we goe: drawing
home our Ankers by maine force, vnder great pieces of Ice,
our endeuour being to put the Ship to the shoare. But to our
great discomforts, when the halfe tyde was made; (which
was two houres before high water) the Ship droue amongst
the Ice to the Eastward (doe what we could) and so would
haue on the shoald Rockes. As I haue formerly said, these
two dayes and this day, was very warme weather: and it
did raine, which it had not yet but once done, since wee came
hither: otherwise, it had beene impossible we could haue
wrought. Withall, the wind shifted also to the South: and
at the very infant, blew a hard puffe: which so continued
for halfe an houre. I caused our two Top-sailes to be had vp
from betwixt deckes, and wee hoyst them vp with ropes in
all haste, and we forst the Ship ashoare, when she had not
halfe a Cables length to driue on the Rocky shoalds. In the
Euening wee broke way thorow the Ice, and put an Anker
to shoareward in fiue foot water: to keepe her to the
shoare, if possible it might be. Here Sir Hugh Willoughby
came into my mind, who without doubt was driuen out of
his Harbour in this manner, and so starued at sea. But God
was more mercifull to vs. About nine a clocke at night, the
winde came vp at North-West, and blew a very storme.
This winde was of the shoare: which blew away all the Ice
from about vs, long before we were afloat. There came in a
great rowling Sea withall, about the point; accompanied
with a great surfe on the shoare. And now were we left to
the mercy of the Sea, on the ground. By tenne, she began
to rowle in her docke: and soone after, began to beate against
the ground. We stood at the Capstang, as many as could:
others at the Pumpes: for we thought that euery fift or sixt
blow would haue staued her to pieces. We heaued to the
vttermost of our strengths, to keepe her as neere the ground

as we could. By reason of this wind, it flowed very much
water: and we drew her vp so high, that it was doubtfull, if
euer we should get her off againe. She continued thus beating,
till two a clocke the next Morning, and then she againe
settled. Whereupon wee went to sleepe, to restore nature:
seeing the next tyde we expected to be againe tormented.
         The sixe and twentieth,26. in the morning tyde, our Ship did
not floate; whereby we had some quietnesse. After prayers,
I cald a consultation of the Master, my Lieutenant, the
Mates, Carpenter, and Boate-swayne; to whom I proposed,
that now we were put to our last shifts; and therefore
they should tell me what they thought of it: Namely, whether
it were not best, to carry all our prouision ashoare: and
that when the winde should come northerly, it were not safest
to draw her further off, and sinke her. After many reasonings
they allowed of my purpose: and so I communicated
it to the Company, who all willingly agreed to it. And
so we fell to getting vp of our prouisions: first our bread, of
which we landed this day two Dryfats with a Hogshead of
Beefe: hauing much adoe to set the Boate thorow the thicke
congealed water. In the Euening, the winde came vp
at North-East, and East: and fild the Bay choakefull
of Ice.
         The twenty seuenth,27. the Bay continued full of Ice, which
I hoped would so continue and freeze, that we should not
be put to sinke our Ship. This day we could land nothing.
         The twenty eighth,28. at breake of day, three of our men
went ashoare ouer the Ice, vnknowne to mee: and the
winde comming vpat West, droue the Ice from betwixt
vs and the shoare, and most part out of the Bay also: And
yet not so, that the Boate could goe ashoare for anything.
I made the Carpenter fit a place against all sudden extremities:
for that with the first North-West, or northerly wind,
I meant to effect our last proiect. In the runne of her, on
the starboord side; he cut away the sealing and the planke to
the sheathing, some foure or fiue inches square; some foure

foote high from the keele of her, that so it might be boared
out, at an instant. We brought our bread which was remayning
in the Bread-roome, vp into the great Cabbin; and
likewise all our powder; setting much of our light dry
things betwixt deckes.
         The nine and twentieth at fiue a Clocke in the Morning,29.
the winde came vp at West North-West, and began to blow
very hard. It was ordinary for the wind to shift from the
West by the North, round about. So first I orderd the
Cooper to goe downe in hold, and looke to all our Caske:
those that were full, to mawle in the bungs of them: those
that were empty, to get vp, or if they could not be gotten
vp, to staue them. Then to quoile all our Cables vpon our
lower tyre: and to lay on our spare Ankers, and any thing
that was weighty, to keepe it downe from rising. By seuen
a Clocke, it blew a storme at North-West, our bitter enemy.
The Ship was already bedded some two foote in the
sand, and whilst that was a flowing, shee must beate. This
I before had in my consideration: for I thought she was so
farre driuen vp, that we should neuer get her off. Yet we
had bin so ferrited by her last beating, that I resolued to sinke
her right downe, rather then runne that hazzard. By nine a
cloke, she began to rowle in her docke, with a most extraordinary
great Sea that was come; which I found to be occasioned
by the formentioned ouerfall. And this was the fatall
houre, that put vs to our wits end. Wherefore I went
downe in hold with the Carpenter, and tooke his auger and
board a hole in the Ship, and let in the water. Thus with all
speed, we began to cut out other places, to boare thorow,
but euery place was full of nailes. By tenne, notwithstanding,
the lower tyre was couered with water, for all which,
she began so to beate in her docke, more and more: that we
could not worke, nor stand to doe any thing in her. Nor
would she sinke so fast as we would haue her: but continued
beating double blowes; first abaft, and then before, that it
was wonderfull, how she could indure a quarter of an houre
with it. By twelue a clocke, her lower Tyre rose: and that

did so counter-beate on the inside, that it beat the bulke heads
of the Bread-roome, powder-roome, and fore piece, all to
pieces: and when it came betwixt deckes, the chests fled
wildly about: and the water did flash and flie wonderfully:
so that now we expected euery minute, when the Ship would
open and breake to pieces. At one a clocke shee beat off her
Rudder: and that was gone, we knew not which way. Thus
shee continued beating, till three a clocke: and then the Sea
came vp on the vpper decke: and soone after, shee began to
settle. In her, wee were faine to sinke the most part of our
bedding and clothes: and the Chirurgions Chest with the
rest. Our men that were ashoare, stood looking vpon vs: almost
dead with cold, and sorrowes to see our misery and their
owne. We lookt vpon them againe: and both vpon each other
with woefull hearts. Darke night drew on; and I bade
the Boate to be haled vp; and commanded my louing companions
to goe all into her: who (in some refusing complements)
expressed their faithfull affections to mee; as loth to
part from me. I told them, that my meaning was to goe ashoare
with them. And thus, lastly, I forsooke the Ship.
         We were seuenteene poore soules, now in the Boate: and
we now imagined that we were leapt out of the Frying pan into
the fire: The ebbe was made; and the water extraordinary
thicke congealed, with snow: so that we thought assuredly,
it would carry vs away into the Sea. We thereupon doublemand
foure oares: appointing foure more to sit ready with
oares: and so with the helpe of God we got to the shoare;
haling vp the Boate after vs. One thing was most strange, in
this thicke water: namely, That there went a great swelling
Sea. Being arriued vpon the land, we greeted our fellowes the
best we could: at which time they could not know vs, nor
we them by our habits nor voyces: so frozen all ouer wee
were, faces, haire, and apparell. And here I meane to take
breath awhile, after all this long and vnpleasant Relation of
our miserable endeauours: Crauing leaue first of all to speake
a word or two in generall.
         The winds, since we came hither, haue beene very variable

and vnconstant: and till within this fortnight, the Southerly
winde was the coldest. The reason I conceiue to be, for that
it did blow from the Maine land; which was all couered with
snow: and for that the North winds came out of the great
Bay which hitherto was open. Adde to that; we were now
vnder a South Banke which did shelter vs: so that we were
not so sensible of it.
         A North-west, a North-west by North, and a North-North-west
winde (if it blew a storme) would raise the
Tydes extraordinarily: and in briefe, from the West Northwest,
to the North North-east; would raise the tydes in proportion,
as they did blow from the middle point: The wind
being on the opposite points (if it blew) it would flow very
little at all. The harder it blew, the lesse water it would
flow. If it were little winde, or calme; it would flow indifferently.
The tydes doe high ordinarily (without being forced)
about three foot: but being forced with the forementioned
winds; vpward of ten foot. I could perceiue no difference
betwixt Neape and spring tydes: It flowes halfe tyde:
that is; the flood comes from the Northward: and thither
returnes againe, two houres before it be high water: and it
is commonly so seene, in most Bayes or Inlets.
      
      
         
         The VVintering.
         AFter we had haled vp the Boate, we
went alongst the breach side in the
darke, towards our house, where we
made a good fire, and with it, and
bread and water, wee thawde and
comforted our selues, beginning after
that to reason one with another, concerning
our Ship. I requir'd that euery
one should speak his mind freely. The Carpenter, (especially)
was of the opinion, that she was founderd; and would neuer
be seruiceable againe. He alledged, that she had so beaten,
that it was not possible, but that all her Ioints were loose,
and seames open: and that by reason it flowed so little water,
and no Creeke nor Coue being neere, wherein to bring
her aground, he could not deuise how he might come to
mend it. Moreouer, her Rudder was lost, and he had no Iron-worke
to hang on another. Some alledged, that we had heaued
her vp so high vpon the sands, that they thought we
should neuer haue her off againe: and that they were assured
she was already dockt three foote. Others, that she lay in
the Tydes way; and that the Ice might teare her to pieces off
the ground: besides which, two of our Ankers we could
not now get from vnder the Ice: which when the Ice brake
(which would be of a great thickenesse by the Spring)
would breake our Ankers to pieces, and then we should haue

no Ankers to bring vs home withall: supposed we got off the
ship, & that she proued sound also. I comforted them the best
I could with such like words: My Masters and faithfull
Companions: be not dismaide for any of these disasters,
but let vs put our whole trust in God. It is he that giueth,
and he that taketh away: he throwes downe with one hand,
and raiseth vp with another. His will be done. If it be our
fortunes to end our dayes here, we are as neere heauen, as in
England; and we are much bound to God Almighty for giuing
vs so large a time of repentance, who as it were dayly
calls vpon vs, to prepare our solues for a better life in heauen.
I make no doubt, but he will be mercifull to vs, both here
on earth, and in his blessed Kingdome: he doth not in the
meane time deny, but that we may vse all honest meanes to
saue and prolong our naturall liues withall: and in my Iudgement,
we are not yet so farre past hope of returning into our
natiue Countries, but that I see a faire way by which wee
may effect it. Admit the Ship be foundered (which God forbid,
I hope the best) yet haue those our owne nation, and
others, when they haue beene put to these extremities, euen
out of the wracke of their lost Ship, built then a Pinnasse,
and recouered to their friends againe. If it be obiected, that
they haue happened into better Climats, both for temperatenesse
of the ayre, and for pacificke and open Seas: and provided
withall, of abundance of fresh victuall: yet there is
nothing too hard for couragious minds: which hitherto
you haue showne, and I doubt not will still doe, to the vttermost.
         They all protested to worke to the vttermost of their
strength, and that they would refuse nothing that I should
order them to doe, to the vttermost hazzard of their liues. I
thanke them all: and to the Carpenter for his cheerefull vndertaking,
I promised to giue him so much plate presently, as
should be worth ten pound sterling: and if so be I went to
England in the Pinnasse, I would giue her him freely, and
fifty pounds in mony ouer and aboue, and would moreouer
gratifie all them, that I should see painefull and industrious.

Thus we then resolued, to build vs a new Pinnasse, with the
timber we should get vpon the Iland: that so in the spring, if
we found not the Ship seruiceable; wee might teare her vp,
and planke her with the Ships planks. And so for this night
we settled our selues close about the fire: and tooke some rest
till day-light.
         The thirtieth betimes in the morning,30. I caused the Chirurgion
to cut the haire of my head short, and to shaue away
all the haire of my face: for that it was become intolerable;
and that it would be frozen so great with Ice-sickles.
         The like did all the rest:Nouember. and we fitted our selues to worke.
The first thing we were to doe, was to get our clothes and
prouisions ashoare: and therefore I deuided the company.
The Master and a conuenient company with him, were to goe
aboord; and to get things out of Hold. The Cock-swaine
with his ging, were to goe in the Boate, to bring and carry
things ashoare. My selfe with the rest, to carry it halfe a mile
thorow the snow, vnto the place where we intended to build
a Store-house; As for the heauier things, we purposed to lay
them vpon the Beache. In the afternoone, the winde was at
South South-west, and the water veerd to so low an ebbe, that
we thought we might get something out of our Hold: we
lanched our Boate therefore: and with oares, set thorow the
thicke congealed water: It did freeze extreme hard: and I
did stand on the shoare with a troubled minde, thinking verily
that with the ebbe the Boate would be carried into the Sea;
and that then wee were all lost men. But by Gods assistance
they got safely to the Ship and made a fire there, to signifie
their arriuall aboord. They fell presently to worke; and got
something out of the Hold, vpon the decks: but night comming
on, they durst not aduenture to come ashoare, but lay
on the bed in the great Cabbin, being almost starued.
         The first of December was so cold,December 1. that I went the same
way ouer the Ice to the Ship, where the Boate had gone yesterday.
This day we carried vpon our backs in bundles 500.
of our fish: and much of our bedding and clothes; which
we were faine to digge out of the Ice.
         
            
The second was milde weather:2. and some of the men going
ouer the Ice, fell in, and very hardly recouered: so that
this day we could land nothing, neither by Boate nor backe:
I put them therfore to make vs a Store-house ashoare. In
the euening, the winde came vp at West: and the Ice did
breake and driue out of the Bay: It was very deepe and large
Ice: that we much doubted it would haue spoyled the Ship.
         The third day,3. there were diuers great pieces of Ice that
came athwart the Ship: and shee stopt them, yet not so, that
we could goe ouer them. We found a way for the Boat: but
when shee was loaden, shee drew foure foot water, and could
not come within a slight-shot of the shoare. The men therefore
must wade thorow the thicke congealed water; and carry
all things out of the Ship vpon their backs. Euery time they
waded in the Ice, it so gathered about the??, that they did seeme
like a walking piece of Ice, most lamentable to behold. In
this extreme cold euening, they cut away as much Ice from
about the Boate as they could, and pickt it with hand-spikes
out of her, and endeauouring to hoyse her into the Ship.
There being small hope, that shee could goe to and againe any
more. But vse what meanes they could, shee was so heauy,
that they could not hoyse her in: but were faine there to
leaue her in the tackles by the Ships side.
         The fourth being Sunday,4. we rested; and performed the
Sabbath duties of a Christian.
         The fift and sixt were extreme cold:5. & 6. and wee made bags
of our store shirts: and in them carried our loose bread ouer
the Ice ashoare vpon our backs. We also digged our clothes
and new sayles with hand-spikes of iron, out of the Ice: and
carried them ashoare, which we dryed by a great fire.
         The seuenth day was so extremely cold,7. that our noses,
cheekes, and hands, did freeze as white as paper.
         The eighth and ninth,8. & 9. it was extreme cold; and it did snow
much, yet we continued our labour; in carrying and rowling
things ashoare. In the euening the water raised the Ice very
high: and it did breake two thoughts of our Boat: and breake
in the side of her: but for that time, we could not helpe it.
         
            
The tenth,10. our Carpenter found timber to make a Keele,
and a Sterne for our Pinnace: the rest wrought about our provisions,
vntill the 13. day: and that we spent in digging our
boate out of the Ice: which we were faine to doe to the very
Keele: and dig the Ice out of her, and then we got her vp
on the Ice: in which doing, many had their noses, cheekes
and fingers, frozen as white as paper. The cold now increased
most extremely. By the 19. we could get no more things
out of our Hold: but were faine to leaue 5. barrels of Beefe
and Porke, all our Beere; and diuers other things: which
were all firme frozen in her.
         The one and twentieth was so cold,21 that we could not goe
out of the house.
         The three and twentieth we went to haue our boate ashoare;23.
running her ouer our oares: but by 10. a clocke
there came such a thicke fogge, that it was as darke as night.
I made them giue ouer, and make what haste we could to
the shoare: which we had much adoe to finde, for the
time, losing one another. At the last we met all at the house,
the miserablest frozen, that can bee conceiued. Vpon divers,
had the cold raised blisters as bigge as wall-nuts. This
we imagined to come, by reason that they came too hastily
to the fire. Our Well was now frozen vp: so that digge as
deepe as we could, we can come by no water. Melted snow-water
is very vnwholsome: either to drinke or to dresse our
victuals. It made vs so short-breathed, that we were scarce
able to speake. All our Sacke, Vineger, Oyle, and euery thing
else that was liquid, was now frozen as hard as a piece of
wood, and we must cut it with a hatchet. Our house was
all frozen on the inside, and it froze hard within a yard of the
fires side. When I landed first vpon this Iland, I found a
spring vnder a hils side: which I then obseruing, had caused
some trees to be cut for markes to know the place againe by.
It was about three quarters of a mile from our house. I sent
3. of our men which had beene formerly with me, thither
vpon the 24. These wading thorow the snow, at last found
the place, and shoueling away the snow, they made way to

the very head of it. They found it spring very strongly: and
brought me a Can of it, for which I was right ioyfull. This
spring continued all the yeere; and did not freeze: but that
we could breake the Ice and come to it. We labor'd very
hard, these three or foure dayes, to get wood to the house,
which we found to be very troublesome, through the deepe
snow.
         Wee then settled our bedding and prouisions, providing
to keepe Christmas day holy: which we solemnized
in the ioyfullest manner we could: So likewise did we Saint
Iohns day: vpon which we named the wood we did winter
in, in memory of that Honourable Knight Sir Iohn Winter,
Winters Forrest. And now in stead of a Christmas Tale, I will
here describe the house that we did liue in, with those adioyning.
         When I first resolued to build a house, I chose the most warmest
and conuenientest place and the neerest the Ship withall.
It was amongst a tuft of thicke trees, vnder a South banke;
about a flight-shot from the Seas side. True it is, that at that
time we could not digge into the ground, to make vs a Hole
or Caue in the earth, (which had been the best way) because we
found water within 2. foote digging: and therefore that
proiect fail'd. It was a white light sand; so that we could by
no meanes make vp a mud-wall. As for stones, there were
none neere vs: which, moreouer, were all now couered with
the snow. We had no boords for such a purpose; and therefore,
we must doe the best we could, with such materials as
we had about vs.
         The house was square; about 20. foote euery way: as
much namely, as our mayne-Course could well couer: first
we droue strong stakes into the earth, round about: which
we watteled with boughes, as thicke as might be, beating
them downe very close. This our first worke was sixe foote
high on both sides, but at the ends, almost vp to the very top.
There we left 2. holes, for the light to come in at: and the
same way the smoke did vent out also. Moreouer, I caused
at both ends, three rowes of thicke bush trees: to be stucke

vp, as close together as mought be possibly. Then at a distance
from the house, we cut downe trees: proportioning them
into lengths of sixe foote; with which we made a pile on
both sides, sixe foote thicke, and sixe foote high: but at
both ends, tenne foote high, and sixe foote thicke: We left
a little low doore to creepe into; and a portall before that,
made with piles of wood, that the wind might not blow
into it. We next of all fastned a rough tree aloft ouer all:
vpon which we laid our rafters; and our Mayne Course ouer
those againe: which lying thwart-wayes ouer all, did
reach downe to the very ground, on either side. And this
was the Fabricke of the out-side of it. On the inside, we
made fast our bonnet sayles, round about. Then we droue
in stakes and made vs bed-stead frames; about three sides of
the house: which bed-steads were double, one vnder another:
the lower-most, being a foote from the ground:
These, we first fild with boughes, then we layd some spare
sayles on that, and then our bedding and clothes. We made a
Hearth or Causie in the middle of the house, and on it,
made our fire: some boords wee layd round about our
Hearth, to stand vpon: that the cold dampe should not
strike vp into vs. With our Wast-clothes, we made vs Canopies
and Curtaines: others did the like with our small
sayles. Our second house was not past 20. foote distant from
this, and made for the watteling much after the same manner,
but it was lesse, and couered with our fore-Course: It had
no pyles on the South side: but in liew of that, we pilde
vp all our Chests, on the inside: and indeed the reflexe of
the heate of the fire against them, did make it warmer then
the Mansion house. In this house, we drest our victuall: and
the subordinate crue did refresh themselues all day in it. A
third house, (which was our store-house) we likewise
made, some twenty paces off from this; for feare of firing.
This house was onely a rough tree fastened aloft: with rafters
layd from it to the ground, and couered ouer with our
new suite of sailes. On the inside, we had laid small trees,
and couered them ouer with boughes: and so stor'd vp our

Bread, and Fish in it; about two foote from the ground:
the better to preserue them. Other things lay more carelessely.
         Long before Christmas, our mansion house was couered
thicke ouer with Snow: almost to the very roofe of it. And
so likewise was our second house: but our Store-house, all
ouer: by reason we made no fire in it. Thus we seemed to
liue in aheape, and Wildernesse of Snow; forth adores we
could not go, but vpon the snow: in which we made vs paths
middle deepe in some places: and in one speciall place, the
length of tenne steps. To doe this, we must shouell away
the Snow first; and then by treadding, make it something
hard vnderfoote: The Snow in this path, was a full yard
thicke vnder vs. And this was our best gallery for the sicke-men:
and for mine owne ordinary walking. And both houses
and walkes, we did daily accommodate more and more, and
make fitter for our vses.
         The twenty seuenth,27. we got our Boate ashore: and fetcht
vp some of our prouisions from the beach side into the
Store-house: and so by degrees did we with therest of our
prouisions: with extremity of cold and labour, making way
with shouels thorow the deepe Snow; euen from the Sea-side
vnto our Store-house. And thus concluded we the old
yeere. 1631.
         
            
               Ianuary, 1632.
            
            The first of Ianuary (and for the most part all the moneth)
was extreme cold.
            The sixth,6. I obserued the latitude, with what exactnesse
I could (it being very cleere Sun-shine weather) which I
found to be 51. 52. This difference, is by reason that here is
a great Refraction.
            The one and twentieth,21. I obserued the Sunne to rise like
an Ouall, alongst the Horizon: I cald three or foure to see
it, the better to confirme my Iudgement: and we all agreed,
that it was twice as long as it was broad. We plainely perceiued

withall, that by degrees as it gate vp higher, it also
recouered his roundnesse.
            The sixe and twentieth,26. I obserued, when the Easterne
edge of the Moone did touch the Planet Mars, the Lions
heart was then in the East quarter 21. 45. aboue the Horizon:
but all this was not done with that exactnesse, that I
haue done other obseruations.
            The thirtieth and one and thirtieth,30. & 31. there appeared in
the beginning of the night, more Starres in the firmament,
then euer I had before seene by two thirds. I could
see the Cloud in Cancer full of small Starres: and all the via
lactea, nothing but small Starres: and amongst the Plyades, a
great many small Starres. About tenne a Clocke, the Moone
did rise; and then a quarter of them was not to be seene.
The wind for the most part of this month, hath beene Northerly,
and very cold: the warmest of which time wee
imployed our selues in fetching Wood, working vpon our
Pinnasse and other things that happened. In the beginning of
this moneth, the Sea was all firmely frozen ouer, so that we
could see no water any way. I hope it will not seeme tedious
to the Readers, if I here deliuer mine owne opinion,
how this abundance of Ice comes to be ingendered.
            The Land that encircles this great Bay, (which lyes in a
broken Irregular forme, making many little shoald Bayes,
and Guts, being, moreouer, full of Ilands and dry sands)
is for the most part low and flat, and hath flat shoalds adioyning
to it, halfe a mile or a mile, that are dry at low water.
Now you must know, that it flowes halfe tyde (as I haue
often experienced) that is, from whence the flood commeth,
the water thither returneth, two houres before it be high
water, or full Sea. It seldome raines, after the middle of
September: but snowes: and that Snow will not melt on the
Land nor Sands; At low water when it snowes (which it
doth very often) the sands are all couered ouer with it;
which the halfe tyde carries officiously (twice in twentie
foure houres) into the great Bay, which is the common Rendezvous
of it, Euery low water, are the sands left cleere, to gather

more to the increase of it. Thus doth it daily gather together
in this manner, till the latter end of October, and by that
time hath it brought the Sea to that coldnesse, that as it
snows, the snow will lye vpon the water in flakes without
changing his colour; but with the winde is wrought together;
and as the winter goes forward, it begins to freeze on
the surface of it, two or three inches or more in one night:
which being carried with the halfe tyde, meets with some
obstacle, (as it soone doth) and then it crumples and so runnes
vpon it selfe, that in a few houres it will be fiue or sixe foote
thicke. The halfe tyde still flowing, carries it so fast away,
that by December it is growne to an infinite multiplication of
Ice. And thus by this storing of it vp, the cold gets the predomination
in the Sea (which also furnisheth the Springs
and water, in the low flat lands) that it cooles it like it selfe.
This may appeare by our experience, though in all this, I freely
submit my selfe vnto the better learned. Our men found it
more mortifying cold to wade thorow the water in the beginning
of Iune when the Sea was all full of Ice; then in
December, when it was increasing. Our Well, moreouer, out
of which we had water in December, we had none in Iuly.
            The ground at ten foote deepe, was frozen. The quantitie
of the Ice, may very easily be made to appeare, by Mathematicall
Demonstration: and yet I am not of the opinion, that
the Bay doth freeze all ouer. For the one and twentieth, the
winde blowing a storme at North, we could perceiue the Ice
to rise something in the Bay.
         
         
            
               February, 1632.
            
            The cold was as extreme this moneth, as at any time we
had felt it this yeere: and many of our men complained of
infirmities. Some, of sore mouthes; all the teeth in their
heads being loose, their gums swolne, with blacke rotten
flesh; which must euery day be cut away. The paine was so
sore on them, that they could not eate their ordinary meat.
Others complained of paine in their heads, and their brests:
Some of weakenesse in their backs; Others of aches in their

thighs and knees: and others, of swellings in their legges.
Thus were two thirds of the company, vnder the Chirurgions
hand. And yet neuerthelesse, they must worke daily; and
goe abroad to fetch wood, and timber; notwithstanding the
most of the?? had no shooes to put on. Their shooes, vpon their
comming to the fire, out of the snow, were burnt and scorcht
vpon their feete: and our store-shooes were all sunke in the
Ship. In this necessitie they would make this shift: To bind
clouts about their feet, and endeauoured by that poore helpe,
the best they could to performe their duties. Our Carpenter
likewise is by this time falne sicke to our great discomforts.
I practised some obseruations by the rising and setting of the
Sunne, calculating the time of his rising and setting, by very
true running glasses. As for our Clocke and Watch, notwithstanding
we still kept them by the fires side, in a Chest wrapt
in clothes, yet were they so frozen, that they could not goe.
My obseruations by these Glasses, I compared with the Stars
comming to the Meridian. By this meanes wee found the
Sunne to rise twentie minutes before it should: and in the
euening to remaine aboue the Horizon twentie minutes (or
thereabouts) longer then it should doe. And all this by reason
of the Refraction.
            Since now I haue spoken so much of the cold, I hope it
will not be too coldly taken, if I in a few words make it
someway to appeare vnto our Readers.
            Wee made three differences of the cold: all according to
the places. In our house, In the woods: and in the open
Ayer, vpon the Ice, in our going to the ship.
            For the last, it would be sometimes so extreme, that it
was not indurable: no Cloathes were proofe against it; no
motion could resist it. It would, moreouer, so freeze the
haire on our eye-lids, that we could not see: and I verily beleeue,
that it would haue stifled a man, in a very few houres:
we did daily find by experience, that the cold in the Woods
would freeze our faces, or any part of our flesh that was bare;
but it was yet not so mortifying as the other. Our house on
the out-side, was couered two thirdparts with Snow; and on

the inside frozen, & hang with Icesickles. The Cloathes on our
beds would be couered with hoare frost: which in this little
habitacle, was not farre from the fire. But let vs come a
little neerer to it. The Cookes Tubs, wherein he did water
his meate, standing about a yard from the fire, and which he
did all day plye with melted Snow-water: yet in the night
season, whilst he slept but one watch, would they be firme
frozen to the very bottome. And therefore was hee faine
to water his meate in a brasse Kettle close adioyning to the
fire; and I haue many times both seene and felt by putting my
hand into it; that side which was next the fire, was very
warme, and the other side an inch frozen; I leaue the rest to
our Cooke; who will almost speake miracles of the cold.
The Surgeon, who had hung his bottles of sirrops, and other
liquid things as conueniently as he could to preserue them,
had them all frozen: our Vineger, Oyle, and Sacke, which
we had in small Caske in the house, was all firme frozen. It
may further in generall be conceiued, that in the beginning of
Iune, the Sea was not broken vp: and the ground was yet
frozen, and thus much wee found by experience, in the burying
of our men: in setting vp the Kings Standard towards
the latter end of Iune: and by our Well, at our comming
away in the beginning of Iuly: at which time vpon the land
for some other reasons, it was very hote weather.
         
         
            
               March, 1632.
            
            The first of this moneth being Saint Dauids day,1. we kept
Holyday, and solemnized it in the manner of the Ancient Britaines:
praying for his Highnesse happinesse Charles Prince
of Wales.
            The fifteenth,15. one of our men thought he had seene a
Deere: whereupon he with two or three more desired that
they might go to see if they could take it: I gaue them leaue:
but in the Euening they returned so disabled with cold,
which did rise vp in blisters vnder the soales of their feete
and vpon their legges, to the bignesse of Walnuts; that they

could not recouer their former estate (which was not very
well) in a fortnight after.
            The sixe and twentieth,16. three more desire that they also
might goe out to try their fortunes: but they returned worse
disabled, and euen almost stifled with the cold.
            This Euening, the Moone rose in a very long Ovale alongst
the Horizon.
            By the last of this moneth, the Carpenter had set vp 17.
ground timbers: and 34. Staddles; and (poore man) hee
proceedeth the best he can, though he be faine to be led vnto
his labour.
            In briefe, all this moneth hath beene very cold. The wind
about the N. W. The snow as deepe as it hath beene all this
winter; But to answer an obiection that may be made, You
were in a wood (may some men say vnto vs) and therefore
you might make fire enough to keepe you from the cold. It
is true, we were in a wood; and vnder a South-banke too:
or otherwise, we had all starued. But I must tell you withall;
how difficult it was to haue wood in a wood: And
first, I will make a muster of the tooles we had: The Carpenter
in his Chest had 2. Axes indeed: but one of them was
spoyl'd in cutting downe wood to pile about our house before
Christmas; When we came first a land, we had but two
whole hatchets, which in a few dayes broke 2. inches below
the Sockets. I cald for 3. of the Coopers hatchets: The
Carpenters axe and the Coopers best hatchet I caused to be
lockt vp: The other 2. hatchets to be new helu'd, and the
blades of the 2. broken hatchets, to be put into a cleft piece
of wood, and then to be bound about with rope yame as
fast as might be: which must be repaired euery day. And
these were all the cutting tooles we had: moreouer the 6. of
February the Carpenter had out his best axe about something,
and one of the company in his absence, by his vndiscreete
handling of it, brake that too, two inches below the Socket:
we must henceforth order these pieces of tooles the best we
could: wherefore I gaue order, that the Carpenter should
haue one of the Coopers hatchets: they that lookt for timber

in the woods, the other: and they that cut downe wood
to burne, were to haue the 2. pieces. And this was before
Christmas.
            The three that were appointed to looke crooked timber,
must stalke and wade, (sometimes on all foure) thorow the
snow: and where they saw a tree likely to fit the mould:
they must first heaue away the snow, and then see if it would
fit the mould: if not, they must seeke further: if it did fit
the mould; then they must make a fire to it, to thawe it:
otherwise it could not be cut. Then cut it downe, and fit it to
the length of the mould: and then with other helpe, get it
home: a mile thorow the snow.
            Now for our firing. We could not burne greene wood, it
would so smoke, that it was not indurable: yea the men had
rather starue without in the cold, then sit by it. As for the dry
wood, that also was bad enough in that kinde: for it was
full of Turpentine, and would send forth such a thicke smoke,
that would make abundance of soote: which made vs all
looke, as if we had beene free of the company of Chimney-Sweepers.
Our cloathes were quite burnt in pieces about vs:
and for the most part, we were all without shooes: But to
our Fuellers againe. They must first (as the former) goe vp
and downe in the snow: till they saw a standing dry tree: for
that the snow couered any that were fallen. Then they must
hacke it downe with their pieces of hatchets: and then others
must carry it home thorow the snow. The boyes with
Cuttleasses, must cut boughes for the Carpenter: for euery
piece of timber that he did worke, must first be thaw'd in
the fire: and he must haue a fire by him, or he could not
worke. And this was our continuall labour, throughout the
forementioned cold: besides our tending of the sicke, and other
necessary imployments.
         
         
            
               Aprill. 1632.
            
            The first of this moneth being Easter-day,1. we solemnized
as religiously as God did giue vs grace. Both this

day and the 2. following Holy-dayes were extreme cold:
And now sitting all about the fire, we reasoned and considered
together vpon our estate; We had 5. men (whereof the
Carpenter was one:) not able to doe any thing. The Boateswayne
and many more, were very infirme: and of all the
rest, we had but 5. that could eate of their ordinary allowance.
The time and season of the yeere came forwards apace:
and the cold did very little mitigate. Our Pinnace was in an
indifferent forwardnesse: but the Carpenter grew worse and
worse: The Ship (as we then thought) lay all full of solid
Ice: which was weight enough to open the seames of any
new and sound vessell: especially of one that had layne so
long vpon the ground as she had done. In briefe, after many
disputations, and laying open of our miserable and hopelesse
estates, I resolued vpon this course: that notwithstanding
it was more labour, and though we declined, weaker
still and weaker: yet that with the first warme weather, we
would begin to cleere the Ship: that so we might haue the
time before vs, to thinke of some other course. This being
ordered, we lookt to those tooles we had, to digge the Ice
out of her: we had but 2. Iron barres ashoare: the rest
were sunke in the Ship: and one of them was broken too.
Well! we fell to fitting of those barres, and of 4. broken
shouels that we had: with which we intended (as after we
did) to digge the Ice out of her: and to lay that Ice on a
heape, vpon the Lar-boord bowe, and to sinke downe that
Ice to the ground so fast, that it should be a Barricadoe to
vs, when the Ice brake vp; which we feared would teare
vs all to pieces.
            The 6. was the deepest snow we had all this yeere:6. which
fild vp all our pathes and wayes, by which we were vsed
to goe vnto the wood: This snow was something moyster
and greater, then any we had had all this yeere: for formerly it
was as dry as dust; and as small as sand, and would driue like
dust with the winde.
            The weather continued with this extremitie,15. vntill the
15. at which time our spring was harder frozen, then it had

beene all the yeere before. I had often obserued the difference
betwixt cleere weather and mistie Refractious weather: in
this manner. From a little hill which was neere adioyning to
our house; in the cleerest weather, when the Sunne shone
with all the puritie of ayre, that I could conceiue: we could
not see a little Iland; which bare off vs South South-east, some
foure leagues off: but if the weather were mistie (as aforesaid)
then we should often see it, from the lowest place. This
little Iland I had seene the last yeere, when I was on Danby
Iland:13. The 13. I tooke the height of it instrumentally; standing
neere the Seas side: which I found to be 34. minutes:
the Sunne being 28. degrees high. This showes, how great
a Refraction here is. Yet may this be noted by the way; That
I haue seene the land eleuated, by reason of the refractious
ayre; and neuerthelesse, the Sunne hath risen perfect round.
            The sixteenth was the most comfortable Sun-shine day,16.
that came this yeere: and I put some to cleere off the snow
from the vpper decks of the Ship; and to cleere and dry the
great Cabbin, by making fire in it. Others I put to digge
downe thorow the Ice, to come by our Anker, that was in
shoald water, which the 17. in the afternoone we got vp,17. and
carried aboord.
            The eighteenth,18. I put them to digge downe thorow the
Ice, neere the place where we thought our Rudder might be.
They digged downe, and came to water: but no hope of finding
of it: we had many doubts, that it mought be sanded:
or that the Ice might haue carried it away already, the last
yeere: or if we could not recouer it by digging before the Ice
brake vp, and droue, there was little hope of it.
            The nineteenth wee continued our myning worke aboord
the Shippe;19. and returned in the Euening to Supper
ashoare: This Day, The Master and two others,
desired that they might lye aboord: which I condiscended
to: for indeed they had laine very discommodiously
all the winter, and with sicke bed-fellowes: as I my selfe
had done; euery one in that kinde taking their fortunes.
By lying aboord, they auoyded the hearing of the miserable

groanings: and lamenting of the sicke men all night long:
enduring (poore soules) intolerable torments.
            By the one and twentieth,21. we had laboured so hard, that
we came to see a Caske; and could likewise perceiue that
there was some water in the Hold. This we knew could not
be thawed water; because it did still freeze night and day
very hard aboord the Ship, and one the land also.
            By the three and twentieth in the Euening,23. wee came to
pierce the forementioned Caske: and found it was full of very
good Beere, which did much reioyce vs all: especially the
sickemen, notwithstanding that it did taste a little of bulgewater.
By this we at that time thought that the holes we had
cut to sinke the Ship, were frozen, and that this water had
stood in the Ship all the Winter.
            The foure and twentieth,24. we went betimes in the morning
to worke: but found that the water was risen aboue
the Ice where we had left work, about two foot: for that the
wind had blowne very hard at North, the night before. In
the morning, the wind came about South, and blew hard, and
although we had little reason for it; we yet expected a lower
veere of the water. I there vpon put them to worke on the
outside of the Ship: that we might come to the lower hole,
which we had cut in the Sterne-Shootes. With much labour
by night, we digged downe thorow the Ice to it; and found
it vnfrozen (as it had bin all the Winter) and to our great
comforts, we found that on the inside, the water was ebd
euen with the hole: and that on the outside, it was ebd a
foot lower. Hereupon I made a shot-boord to be naild on it:
and to be made as tight as might be, to try if the water came
in any other way. To the other two holes, we had digged on
the inside: and found them frozen? Now I did this betimes,
that if we found the Ship foundered, we might resolue of
some course to saue, or prolong our liues, by getting to
the maine before the Ice were broken vp: for, as for our
Boate, it was too little, and bulged, besides that. Our Carpenter
was by this time past hope: and therefore little hope
had we of our Pinnasse. But which was worst of all, we

had not foure men able to trauell through the Snow ouer the
Ice, and in this miserable estate were we at this present.
            The 25. we satisfied our longing:25. for the winde now comming
about Northerly, the water rose by the Ships side (where
we had digged downe) a foot and more aboue the Hold: and
yet did not rise within boord. This did so incourage vs, that
we fell very lustily to digging, and to heaue out the Ice, out
of the ship. I put the Cooke and some others, to thaw the
pumps: who by continuall powring of hot water into them;
by the 27. in the morning they had cleered one of them:
which we say-ing, found that it did deliuer water very sufficiently.
Thus we fell to pumping: and hauing cleered two
foot water, we then left to haue a second tryall. Continuing
our worke thus,28. in digging the Ice; by the 28. we had cleered
our other pumpe: which we also found to deliuer water
very well: We found likewise, that the water did not
rise any thing, in Hold.
            The 29. it rained all day long,29. a sure signe to vs, that winter
was broken vp.
            The 30. wee were betimes aboord at our worke:30. which
day,31. and the one and thirtieth, were very cold, with snow
and haile: which did pinch our sicke men more then any
time this yeere. This euening being May Euen; we returned
late from our worke to our house: and made a good fire, and
chose Ladies, and did ceremoniously weare their names in
our Caps: endeauouring to reuiue our selues by any meanes.
And because you heare vs in this merry humour; I will make
knowne to you what good cheere we kept at Christmas and
Easter: and how we had dieted our selues all the winter.
            At our comming foorth of England, we were stored with
all sort of Sea prouisions: as Beefe, Porke, Fish, &c. but
now that we had little hope of refreshing, our Cooke did
order it in this manner.
            The Beefe which was to serue on Sunday-night to Supper;
he did boyle on Saterday-night, in a Kettle full of water, with
a quart of Oaterneale, about an houre: Then taking the Beefe
out, he boyled the rest till it came to halfe the quantitie: And

this we called porridge: which with bread we did eate, as
hot as we could: and after this we had our ordinary of fish.
Sunday dinner, wee had Porke and Pease: and at night the
former boyled Beefe made more porridge. In this manner
our Tuesdayes Beefe was boyled on the Munday nights: and
the Thursdayes, vpon the Wednesdayes. And thus all the
weeke (except Friday night) we had some warme thing in
our bellies euery supper. And (surely) this did vs a great
deale of good. But soone after Christmas, many of vs fell
sicke, and had sore mouthes: and could neither eate Beefe,
Porke, Fish, nor Porridge. Their dyet was onely this: They
would pound Bread, or Oatmeale in a morter, to meale: then
fry it in a frying panne, with a little oyle, and so eate it. Some
would boyle Pease to a soft paste, and feed as well as they
could, vpon that. For the most part of the winter, water
was our drinke. In the whole winter, we tooke not aboue a
doozen Foxes: many of which would be dead in the traps,
two or three dayes, oftentimes; and then when the blood
was settled, they would be vnwholesome. But if we tooke
one aliue, that had not bin long in the trap, him we boyled,
and made broth for the weakest sicke men of him: the flesh
of it being soft boyled they did eate also.
            Some white partridges we kild: but not worth the mentioning
towards any refreshing.
            We had three sorts of sickemen. Those that could not
moue nor turne themselues in their Beds, who must be tended
like an Infant. Others that were as it were creepled
with scuruy Aches. And others lastly, that were something
better. Most of all had sore mouthes. You may now aske
me, how these infirme men could worke? I will tell you:
Our Surgeon (which was diligent, and a sweet-conditioned
man, as euer I saw) would be vp betimes in the mornings;
and whilest he did picke their Teeth, and cut away the dead
flesh from their Gummes, they would bathe their owne
thighes, knees, and legges. The manner whereof way this:
There was no tree, bud, nor herbe; but we made tryall of it:
and this being first boyled in a Kettle, and then put in a small

Tubs, and Basons: they put it vnder them, and couering
themselues with Cloathes vpon it; this would so mollifie
the grieued parts, that although, when they did rise out of
their Beds, they would be so crippled, that they could scarce
stand: yet after this done halfe an houre, they would be able
to goe (and must goe) to wood, thorow the Snow, to the
Ship, and about their other businesse. By night, they would
be as bad againe: and then they must bee bathed, anoynted,
and their mouthes againe drest, before they went to Bed. And
with this dyet, and in this manner, did we goe thorow our
miseries.
            I euer doubted, that we should be weakest in the Spring;
and therefore had I reserued a Tun of Alegant Wine vnto
this time. Of this, by putting seuen parts of water, to one
of wine, we made some weake Beuerage: which (by reason
that the wine by being frozen, had lost his Vertue) was
little better then water. The sicker sort had a Pint of Alegant
a day, by it selfe; and of such poore Aqua vitae too, as
we had, they had a little dramme allowed them next their
hearts euery morning; and thus wee made the best vse of
what we had, according to the seasons.
         
         
            
               May, 1632.
            
            The first,1. we went aboord betimes, to heaue out the Ice.
            The second,2. it did snow and blow, and was so cold, that
we were faine to keepe house all day. This vnexpected cold
at this time of the yeere did so vexe our sicke men; that they
grew worse and worse: we cannot now take them out of
their beds, but they would swound: and we had much adoe,
to fetch life in them.
            The third,3. those that were able, went aboord betimes to
heaue out the Ice. The Snow was now melted in many places
vpon the Land, and stood in plashes: and now there
came some Cranes, and Geese to it.
            The fourth,4. while the rest wrought aboord, I and the
Surgeon went with a couple of pieces, to see if we could

kill any of these fowle for our sicke men, but neuer did I
see such wild-fowle: They would not indure to see any
thing mooue. Wherefore we returned within 2. houres, not
being able to indure any longer stalking thorow the snow,
and the wet plashes. I verily thought that my feet and legs
would haue fallen off, they did so torment me with aking.
            The 6. Iohn Wardon,6. the Master of my Ships chiefe Mate
dyed, whom we buried in the Euening (in the most Christian-like
manner we could) vpon the top of a bare hill of
sand: which we cald Brandon Hill.
            The weather continued very cold: freezing so hard in a
night, that it would beare a man.
            By the 9. we were come to,9. and got vp our fiue barrels of
Beefe and Porke, and had found 4. Buts of Beere, and one of
Cydar, which God had preserued for vs: It had layne vnder
water all the winter; yet we could not perceiue that it
was any thing the worse. God make vs euer thankefull for
the comfort it gaue vs.
            The 10. it did snow and blow so cold,10. that we could not
stirre out of the house: yet neuerthelesse, by day the snow
vanisheth away apace on the land.
            The 11. we were aboord betimes,11. & 12. to heaue out Ice. By
the 12. at night, we had cleered out all the Ice, out of the
Hold: and found likewise our store-shooes which had layne
soakt in the water all the winter: but we dried them by the
fire, and fitted our selues with them. We strooke againe our
Cables into the Hold; there stowd we a But of Wine also,
which had beene all the Winter on the vpper decke, and continued
as yet, all firme frozen. We fitted the Ship also: making
her ready to sinke her againe, when the Ice brake vp.
We could hitherto find no defect in her: and therefore well
hoped, that she was stanche. The Carpenter, neuerthelesse,
did earnestly argue to the contrary: alleadging, that now she
lay on the ground, in her Docke; and that the Ice had fild
her defects: and that the Ice was the thing that kept out
the water: but when she should come to labour in the sea;
then doubtlesse, she would open. And indeed we could

now see quite through her seames, betwixt wind and water.
But that which did trouble vs as ill as all this, was the losse
of her Rudder: and that she now lay in the very strength of
the Tyde: which, when euer the Ice droue, might teare her
to pieces. But we still hoped the best.
            The 13.13. being the Sabbath Day, we solemnized; giuing
God thankes for those hopes and comforts we dayly had:
The weather by day-time was pretty and warme: but it did
freeze by night: yet now we could see some bare patches
of land.
            The 14.14. we began a new sort of worke. The Boateswaine
and a conuenient number sought ashoare the rest of
our Rigging: which was much spoyld by pecking of it out
of the Ice: and this they now fell to fitting, and to seruing of
it. I set the Cooper to fit our Caske, although (poore man)
he was very infirme: my intent being, to passe some Cables
vnder the Ship, and so to Buoy her vp with these Caske; if
otherwise we could not get her off. Some others, I ordered
to goe see, if they could kill some wild-fowle for our sicke
men: who now grew worse and worse. And this is to be
remembred, that we had no shot, but what we did make of
the Aprons of our Gunnes and some old pewter that I had:
for the Carpenters-sheet-lead, we durst not vse.
            The 15. I manured a little patch of ground,15. that was bare
of snow; and sowed it with Peason: hoping to haue some of
the hearbs of them shortly, to eate: for as yet we can finde
no greene thing to comfort vs.
            The 18. our Carpenter William Cole dyed,18. a man generally
bemoaned of vs all: asmuch for his innate goodnesse, as
for the present necessity we had of a man of his quality. He
had indured a long sicknesse, with much patience, and made
a very godly end. In the Euening, we buried him by Master
Wardon: accompanied with as many as could goe: for 3.
more of our principall men, lay then expecting a good houre.
And now were we in the most miserable estate, that we
were in all the voyage. Before his extreme weaknesse, he
had brought the Pinnace to that passe, that she was ready

to be boulted and trenneld; and to be ioyn'd together to receiue
the planke: so that we were not so discouraged by his
death, but that we did hope of our selues to finish her: if the
Ship proved vnseruiceable.
            This our Pinnace was 27. foot by the Keele, 10. foot
by the Beame, and 5. foot in Hold: she had 17. ground timbers,
34. principall Staddles, and 8. short Staddles. He had
contriued Her with a round sterne, to saue labour: and indeed
she was a well proportioned Vessell. Her burthen was
12. or 14. Tunne.
            In the Euening, the Master of our Ship, after buriall returning
aboord Ship, and looking about her: discouered
some part of our Gunner; vnder the Gun-roome ports. This
man, we had committed to the Sea at a good distance from
the Ship, and in deep water, neere 6. moneths before.
            The 19. in the morning,19. I sent men to dig him out, he
was fast in the Ice, his head downewards, and his heele vpward,
for he had but one legge; and the plaster was yet at
his wound: In the afternoone, they had digd him cleere out:
after all which time, he was as free from noysomenesse, as
when we first committed him to the Sea. This alteration had
the Ice and water, and time onely wrought on him: that his
flesh would slip vp and downe vpon his bones, like a gloue
on a mans hand. In the Euening we buried him by the others.
This day, one George Vgganes (who could handle a toole best
of vs all) had indifferent well repaired out boate: and so we
ended this mournefull weeke. The snow was by this time
prettily well wasted in the woods: and we hauing a high
tree, on the highest place of the Iland, which we called our
watch-tree; from the top of it we might see into the sea, but
found no appearance of breaking vp yet.
            This 20. being Whit-Sunday,20. we sadly solemnized, and
had some taste of the wilde-fowle: but not worth the
writing.
            The one and twentieth,21. was the warmest Sunne-shine-day,
that came this yeere. I sent 2. a-fowling: and my selfe taking
the Master, the Surgeon, and one more, with our pieces

and our Dogs, we went into the woods to see what comfort
wee could finde. Wee wandred from the house eight
miles; and searcht with all diligence: but returned comfortlesse,
not an herbe nor leafe eatable, that we could finde. Our
Fowlers had as bad successe. In the woods, wee found the
Snow partly wasted away, so that it was passable. The ponds
were almost vnthawd: but the Sea from any place we could
see all firme frozen.
            The snow doth not melt away here with the Sunne or
raine; and so make any land-floods; as in England: but it is
exhaled vp by the Sunne, and suckt full of holes, like honeycombs:
so that the sand whereon it lyes, will not be at all
wetted. The like obseruation wee also had: that let it raine
euer so much, you shall see no land-floods after it.
            The two and twentieth,22. we went aboord the Ship: and
found that shee had made so much water, that it was now risen
aboue the ballast, which made vs doubt againe of her
soundnesse. We fell to pumping, and pumpt her quite dry.
And now by day sometimes, we haue such hot gloomes, that
we cannot endure in the Sunne: and yet in the night it would
freeze very hard. This vnnaturalnesse of the season, did torment
our men, that they now grew worse and worse daily.
            The three and twentieth,23. our Boat-swayne (a painefull
man) hauing beene long sicke, which he had heartily resisted,
was taken with such a painefull ache in one of his
thighs; that we verily thought he would haue presently dyed.
He kept his bed all day in great extremitie: and it was a
maxime amongst vs; that if any one kept his bed two dayes,
he could rise no more. This made euery man to striue to keepe
vp, for life.
            The foure and twentieth was very warme Sun-shine:24. and
the Ice did consume by the shores side, and crackt all ouer the
Bay, with a fearefull noyse. About three in the afternoone,
we could perceiue the Ice with the ebbe to driue by the Ship.
Whereupon I sent two with all speed vnto the Master, with
order: to beate out the hole, and to sinke the Ship: as likewise
to looke for the Rudder, betwixt the Ice. This he presently

performed: and a happy fellow, one Dauid Hammon,
pecking betwixt the Ice, strooke vpon it, and it came vp with
his lance: who crying that he had found it, the rest came and
got it vp on the Ice, and so into the Ship. In the meane space,
with the little drift that the Ice had, it began to rise and mount
into high heaps against the shoald shoares, and rocks: and
likewise against the heape of Ice, which we had put for a
Barricado to our Ship: but with little harme to vs. Yet we
were faine to cut away 20. faddome of Cable which was
frozen in the Ice. After an houre, the Ice settled againe, as
not hauing any vent outwards. Oh! this was a ioyfull day to
vs all: and we gaue God thanks for the hopes we had of it.
            The fiue and twentieth was a fine warme day;25 and with
the ebbe, the Ice did driue against the Ship, and shake her
shrowdly.
            The sixe and twentieth,26. I tooke the Chirurgion with mee,
and went againe to wander the woods: and went to that Bay,
where last yeere wee had lost our man Iohn Barton. But we
could finde no signe of him, nor of other reliefe.
            By the eight and twentieth it was pretty and cleere,28. betwixt
the Ship and the shoare, and I hoped the Ice would no more
dangerously oppresse vs. Wherefore I caused the lower hole
to be firmely stopt: the water then remaining three foot, aboue
the Ballast.
            The nine and twentieth,29. being Prince Charles his birth day;
we kept Holy-day, and display'd his Maiesties Colours: both
aland and aboord; and named our habitation Charles Towne;
by contraction Charlton: and the Iland, Charlton Iland.
            The thirtieth we lanched our Boate;30. and had intercourse
sometimes betwixt the Ship and the shoare by Boat: which
was newes to vs.
            The last of this moneth, we found on the Beach some
Vetches, to appeare out of the ground; which I made the
men to pick vp, and to boyle for our sicke men.
            This day, we made an end of fitting all our Rigging and
Sayles: and it being a very hot day, we did dry and new make
our Fish in the Sunne: and ayred all our other prouisions.

There was not a man of vs at present, able to eate of our salt
prouisions, but my selfe and the Master of my Ship. It may
be here remembred, that all this Winter wee had not beene
troubled with any rhumes, nor flegmaticall diseases. All this
moneth the winde hath beene variable, but for the most part
Northerly.
         
         
            
               Iune. 1632.
            
            The foure first dayes, it did snow, haile, and blow very
hard; and was so cold, that the Ponds of water did freeze ouer:
and the water in our Cans did freeze in the very house:
our clothes also that had beene washed and hung out to dry,
did not thaw all day.
            The fift,5. it continued blowing very hard in the broad side
of the Ship: which did make her swag and wallow in her
Docke for all shee was sunken: which did much shake her.
The Ice withall did driue against her, and gaue her many
fearefull blowes. I resolued to endeuour to hang the Rudder;
and when God sent vs water, (notwithstanding the abundance
of Ice that was yet about vs) to haue her further off:
In the afternoone, we vnder-run our small Cable to our Anker,
which lay a-Sterne in deepe water; and so with some difficultie
gate vp our Anker: This Cable had laine slacke vnder-foot,
and vnder the Ice, all the Winter: and wee could
neuer haue a cleere slatch from Ice, to haue it vp, before now;
we found it not a iot the worse. I put some to make Colrakes;
that they might goe into the water, and rake a hole in
the sands to let downe our Rudder.
            The sixth,6. we went about to hang it. And our young lustiest
men tooke turnes, to goe into the water, and to rake
away the sand: but they were not able to indure the cold
of it halfe a quarter of an houre, it was so mortifying: yea,
vse what comforts we could, it would make them swound
and dye away. We brought it to the Sternepost: but were
then faine to giue it ouer, being able to worke at it no longer.
Then we plugg'd vp the vpper holes, within boord: and fell
to pumping the water againe out of her.
            
               
The seuenth we wrought something about our Rudder,7.
but were againe forced to giue ouer; and to put out our Cables
ouer-boord, with Messengers vnto them: the Ankers
lying to that passe, that we might keepe her right in her
docke, when we should haue brought her light.
            By the eighth at night,8. we had pumpt all the water out of
her: and shee at a high water would fleet in her docke,
though she were still dockt in the sands, almost fourefoot.
This made vs to consider what was to be done. I resolued to
heaue out all the Ballast: for that the bottome of her being so
soakt all the winter, I hoped was so heauy, that it would beare
her. If we could not get her off that way, I then thought
to cut her downe to the lower decke, and take out her
Masts: and so with our Caske to Buoy her off.
            The ninth,9. betimes in the morning wee fell to worke,
we hoyst out our Beere and Cydar, and made a raft of it;
fastning it to our shoare-Anker: The Beere and Cydar sunke
presently to the ground: which was nothing strange to vs;
for that any wood or pipe-slaues that had layne vnder the Ice
all the winter, would also sinke downe, so soone as euer
it was heaued ouer-boord: This day we heaued out tenne
tunne of Ballast. And here I am to remember Gods goodnesse
towards vs: in sending those forementioned greene
Vetches. For now our feeble sicke men, that could not for
their liues stirre these two or three months, can indure the
ayre and walke about the house: our other sicke men gather
strength also: and it is wonderfull to see how soone they
were recouered. We vsed them in this manner: Twice a day
we went to gather the herbe or leafe of these Vetches, as
they first appeared out of the ground: then did we wash and
boyle them, and so with Oyle and Vineger that had been frozen,
we did eate them: It was an excellent sustenance and
refreshing: the most part of vs ate nothing else: we would
likewise bruise them, and take the Iuyce of them, and mixe
that with our drinke: we would eate them raw also, with
our bread.
            The eleuenth was very warme weather,11. and we did hang

our Rudder. The tydes did now very much deceiue vs: for
a Northerly wind would very little raise the water. This
made vs doubt of getting off our Ship.
            The thirteenth I resolued of the Latitude of this place,13.
so that hauing examined the Instruments, and practised about
it this Fortnight, I now found it to be in 52 degrees, and 3
minutes.
            The foureteenth wee had heaued out all the Ballast,14.
and carried all our Yards, and euery thing else of weight ashoare,
so that we now had the Ship as light as possible it
could be.
            The fifteenth we did little but exercise our selues:15. seeing
that by this time, our men that were most feeble, are now
growne strong, and can runne about. The flesh of their
gummes became settled againe, and their teeth fastned: so
that they can eate Beefe with their Vetches.
            This day I went to our Watch-tree: but the Sea (for any
thing I could perceiue to the contrary) was still firme frozen:
and the Bay we were in, all full of Ice, hauing no way to
vent it.
            The sixteenth was wondrous hot,16. with some thunder
and lightning, so that our men did goe into the ponds ashoare,
to swimme and coole themselues: yet was the water very
cold still. Here had lately appeared diuers sorts of flyes: as
Butterflyes, Butchers-flyes, Horseflyes: and such an infinit
abundance of bloud-thirsty Muskitoes, that we were more
tormented with them, then euer we were with the cold weather.
These (I thinke) lye dead in the old rotten wood all
the winter, and in summer they reuiue againe. Here be likewise
infinite company of Ants, and Frogs in the ponds vpon
the land: but we durst not eate of them; they lookt so
speckled like Toads. By this time were there neither Beares,
Foxes, nor Fowle to be seene: they are all gone.
            The seuenteenth,17. the wind came Northerly, and wee expecting
a high Tyde, in the morning betimes, put out our
small Cable asterne out at the Gun-roome-port: but the
morning Tyde we had not water by a foot. In the Euening

I had laid markes, by stones, &c. and mee thoughts the
water did flow apace. Making signes therefore for the Boate
to come ashoare; I tooke all that were able to doe any thing
with me aboord: and at high water (although she wanted
something to rise cleere out of her docke) yet we heau'd with
such a good will, that we heaued her thorow the sand into
a foot and a halfe deeper water. Further then so, we durst
not yet bring her, for that the Ice was all thicke about vs.
After we had moor'd her, we went all to prayers: and gaue
God thankes, that had giuen vs our ship againe.
            The 18th.18. we were vp betimes: the Cooper, and some
with him, to fill fresh water: my selfe with some others,
to gather stones at low-water; which we pyling vp in a
heape, at high water the Cock-swaine and his Ging, fetcht
them aboord: where the Master with the rest stood them.
The Ship at low water had a great lust to the offing: by
which meanes we could the better come and stop the two
vpper holes firmely: after which we fitted other conuenient
places, to make others to sinke her, if occasion were.
            The ninteenth,19. we were all vp betimes to worke, as afore
specified: these two dayes, our Ship did not fleet: and
it was a happy houre, when we got her off, for that we
neuer had such a high Tyde all the time we were here. In the
Euening, I went vp to our Watch tree: and this was the
first time I could see any open water, any way: except that
little by the shoareside, where we were. This put vs in
some comfort, that the Sea would shortly breake vp: which
wee knew must bee to the Northward; seeing that way
we were certaine, there was aboue two hundred leagues
of Sea.
            The 20.20. we laboured as aforesaid. The winde at N. N. W.
The tyde rose so high, that our Ship fleeted, and we drew
her further off, into a foote and a halfe deepe water. Thus
we did it by little and little; for that the Ice was still wonderfull
thicke about vs.
            The 22.22. there droue much Ice about vs, and within vs, and
brought home our Sterne-Anker. At high water (notwithstanding

all the Ice) we heau'd our Ship further off: that so
she might lie aflote at low-water.
            The next low-water, we sounded all about the Ship: and
found it very foule ground, we discouered stones 3. foote
high, aboue the ground, and 2. of them within a Ships breadth
of the Ship: whereby did more manifestly appeare Gods
mercies to vs: for if when we forced her ashoare, she had
strooken one blow against those stones, it had bulged her.
Many such dangers were there in this Bay: which we now
first perceiued, by the Ices grounding and rising against them.
In the Euening, we tow'd off the Ship, vnto the place she rid
the last yeere, and there moord her. Shering the Ship, night
and day, flood and ebbe, amongst the disperst Ice that came
athwart of vs.
            The 23.23. we laboured in fetching our prouisions aboord:
which to doe, we were faine to wade to carry it to the boate
a full flight-shot: and all by reason the winde was Southerly.
This morning, I tooke an Obseruation of the Moones comming
to the South, by a Meridian line of 120. yards long:
which I had rectified many weeks before-hand.
            The 24.24. I tooke another Obseruation of the Moones comming
to the Meridian: for which I referre you to the obseruations
in the latter end of this Iournall.
            Whereas I had formerly cut downe a very high tree, and
made a Crosse of it, to it I now fastened (vppermost) the
Kings and Queenes Maiesties Pictures; drawne to the life:
and doubly wrapt in lead, and so close, that no weather could
hurt them. Betwixt both these I affixed his Maiesties Royall
Title: Viz. Charles the first King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland: as also of New-found-land, and of these
Territories, and to the Westward, as farre as Nova Albion,
and to the Northward to the Latitude of 80. degrees, &c.
            On the out-side of the lead, I fastened a shilling and a sixepence
of his Maiesties Coyne: vnder that, we fastened the
Kings Armes, fairely cut in lead: and vnder that, the Armes
of the City of Bristoll. And this being Midsummer-Day,
we raised it on the top of the bare Hill, where we had buried

our dead fellowes: formally by this ceremony taking possession
of these Territories, to his Maiesties vse.
            The winde continuing Southerly and blowing hard, put
all the Ice vpon vs: so that the Ship now rid amongst it, in
such apparent danger, that I thought verily we should haue
lost her. We laboured, flood and ebbe, both with poles and
oares, to heaue away and part the Ice from her. But it was
God that did protect and preserue vs: for it was past any
mans vnderstanding, how the Ship could indure it, or we
by our labour saue her. In the night, the winde shifted
to the Westward, and blew the Ice from vs: whereby we
had some rest.
            The 25.25. in the morning, the Boate-swayne with a conuenient
crue with him, began to rigge the Ship: the rest fetching
our prouisions aboord. About 10. a clocke, when it was
something darke, I tooke a Lance in my hand; and one with
me with a Musket and some fire, and went to our watch-tree;
to make a fire on the eminentest place of the Iland: to see if
it would be answered: Such fires I had formerly made, to
haue knowledge if there were any Saluages on the maine or
the Ilands about vs. Had there beene any, my purpose was to
haue gone to them, to get some intelligence of some Christians,
or some Ocean Sea thereabouts. When I was come to
the tree, I laid downe my Lance, and so did my Consort his
Musket: and whilest my selfe climed vp to the top of the
tree, I ordered him to put fire vnto some low tree therabouts.
He, (vnaduisedly) put fire to some trees that were to wind-ward:
so that they (and all the rest too by reason it had beene
very hot weather) being seare and dry, tooke fire like flaxe
or hempe: and the wind blowing the fire towards me, I
made haste downe the tree. But before I was halfe way down,
the fire tooke in the bottome of it, and blazed so fiercely
vpwards, that I was faine to leape off the tree, and downe a
steepe hill, and in briefe, with much adoe, escapt burning.
The mosse on the ground was as dry as flaxe: and it would
runne most strangely, and like a traine along the earth. The
Musket and the Lance were both burnt. My Consort at last

came to me, and was ioyfull to see me: for he thought verily
I had bin burned. And thus we went homeward together,
leauing the fire increasing, and still burning most furiously.
We could see no answer of it. I slept but little all night after:
and at breake of day, I made all our Powder and Beefe, to be
carried aboord. This day, I went to the hils, to looke to the
fire: where I saw how it did still burne most furiously:
both to the Westward, and Northward: leauing one vpon
the hils to watch it, I came home immediately, and made
them take downe our new suite of sayles, and carry them to
the seas-side, ready to be cast in, if occasion were, and to
make haste to take downe our houses. About noone, the
winde shifted Northerly; and our Sentinell came running
home, bringing vs word that the fire did follow him at hard
heeles, like a traine of powder. It was no neede to bid vs
take downe and carry all away to the sea-side. The fire came
towards vs with a most terrible rattling noyse: bearing a full
mile in breadth: and by that time wee had vncouered our
houses and laid hand on, to carry away our last things: the
fire was come to our Towne and seazed on it, and (in a
trice) burnt it downe to the ground. We lost nothing of
any value in it: for we had brought it all away into a place
of security. Our dogges, in this combustion, would sit
downe on their tayles, and howle, and then runne into the
Sea, on the shoalds, and there stay. The winde shifted
Easterly: and the fire ranged to the Westward, seeking
what it might deuoure. This night, we lay all together aboord
the Ship, and gaue God thankes, that had Shipt vs in
her againe.
            The twentie seuen,27. twentie eight, and twentie nine; wee
wrought hard, in fetching our things aboord, as likewise our
water, which we must towe off with the ebbe, and bring it
to the Ship with the flood. Moreouer, we must goe about the
Easter-point for drift-wood: for our tooles were all so spent,
that we could cut none. Wherefore, about some three dayes
agone, I had caused our Pinnace to be sawed to pieces, and
with that we stowed our Caske, intending to burne it at

low waters, and such other times, as we could not worke in
carrying things aboord. I employed the men in fetching
stones: and we did build three Tombs ouer our three dead
fellowes; filling them vp with sand in a decent and handsome
fashion. The least Tombe, had two tunnes of stones about it.
            The thirtieth, we most earnestly continued our labour: and
brought our sayles to yard: and by eleuen a clocke at night
had made a priddy Ship: meaning to haue finished our businesse
with the weeke and the moneth, that so we might the
better solemnize the Sabbath ashoare to morrow, and so take
leaue of our wintering Iland.
            The winde hath been variable a great while: and the Bayes
are now so cleere of Ice, that we cannot see a piece of it: for
it was all gone to the Northward. Hoping therefore that it
giue content to some Readers: I will relate the manner of
the breaking of it vp. It is first to be noted, that it doth not
freeze (naturally) aboue sixe foot: the rest, is by accident.
Such is that Ice that you may see here, sixe faddome thicke.
This we had manifest proofe of, by our digging the Ice out
of the Ship: and by digging to our Ankers, before the Ice
broke vp.
            In May, when the heate increaseth, it thawes first on the
shoald by the shoare side: which when it hath done round
about, then the courses of the tydes (as well by the ebbe and
flood, as by their rising and falling) doe so shake the maine
Ice, that it cracks and breakes it. Thus, when it hath gotten
roome for motion; then runnes one piece of it vpon another:
and so bruises and grinds it selfe against the shoalds and
rocks, that it becomes abbreuiated, insomuch that a Ship may
haue well passage thorow it. Besides this; much of it is thrust
vpon the shoalds, where it is much consumed by the heate of
the Sunne. The season here in this Climate, is most vnnaturall:
for in the day time, it will be extreme hot: yea not indurable
in the Sunne, which is, by reason that it is a sandy
countrey. In the night againe, it will freeze an inch thicke in
the ponds, and in the tubs about and in our house: And all
this, towards the latter end of Iune.
            
               
The Muskitoes vpon our comming away, were most intolerable.
Wee tore an old Auncient in pieces, and made vs
bagges of it to put our heads in: but it was no fortification
against them. They would finde wayes and meanes to sting
vs, that our faces were swolne hard out in pumples, which
would so itch and smart, that we must needs rubbe and teare
them. And these flyes, indeed, were more tormenting to vs,
then all the cold we had heretofore indured.
         
         
            
               Iuly. 1632.
            
            The first of this month being Sunday, we were vp betimes.
And I caused our Ship to be adorned the best we could: our
Ancient on the Poope, and the Kings Colours in the maine
top. I had prouided a short briefe of all the passages of our
voyage to this day: I likewise wrote in what state we were
at present, and how I did intend to prosecute the discouery,
both to the Westward, and to the Southward, about this
Iland. This Briefe discourse I had concluded, with a request
to any Noble minded Trauaylor that should take it downe, or
come to the notice of it: that if we should perish in the
Action, then to make our indeuours knowne to our Soueraigne
Lord the King. And thus with our Armes, Drumme
and Colours, Cooke and Kettle, we went ashoare, and first
we marcht vp to our eminent Crosse, adioyning to which we
had buried our dead fellowes. There we read morning prayer,
and then walked vp and downe till dinner time. After
dinner we walkt to the highest Hils, to see which way the
fire had wasted. We descryed that it had consumed to the
Westward, sixteene miles at least, and the whole bredth of
the Iland: neere about our Crosse and dead, it could not
come: by reason it was a bare sandy Hill. After Euening
prayer, I happened to walke alongst the Beach side: where
I found an herbe resembling Scuruy-grasse. I made some to
be gathered: which we boyld with our meate to supper:
It was most excellent good, and farre better them our Vetches.
After supper we went all to seeke and gather more of

it: which we did, to the quantity of two bushels which did
afterwards much refresh vs: And now the Sunne was set,
and the Boat comne ashoare for vs: whereupon we assembled
our selues together, and went vp to take the last view
of our dead, and to looke vnto their Tombes, and other
things: here leaning vpon mine arme, on one of their Tombes
I vttered these lines, which though perchance they may procure
laughter in the wiser sort (which I shall be glad of) they
yet moued my young and tender-hearted companions at that
time with some compassion. And these they were.
            I Were vnkind, vnlesse that I did shead,
            Before I part, some teares vpon our dead:
            And when my eyes be dry, I will not cease
            In heart to pray, their bones may rest in peace:
            Their better parts, (good soules) I know were giuen,
            With an intent they should returne to heauen.
            Their liues they spent, to the last drop of bloud,
            Seeking Gods glory, and their Countries good,
            And as a valiant Souldier rather dyes,
            Then yeelds his courage to his Enemies:
            And stops their way, with his hew'd flesh, when death
            Hath quite depriu'd him of his strength and breath:
            So haue they spent themselues; and here they lye,
            A famous marke of our Discouery.
            We that suruiue, perchance may end our dayes
            In some imployment meriting no praise;
            And in a dung-hill rot: when no man names
            The memory of vs, but to our shames.
            They haue out-liu'd this feare, and their braue ends,
            Will euer be an honour to their friends.
            Why drop ye so, mine eyes? Nay rather powre
            My sad departure in a solemne showre.
            The Winters cold, that lately froze our bloud,
            Now were it so extreme, might doe this good,
            As make these teares, bright pearles: which I would lay,
            Tomb'd safely with you, till Doomes fatall day.
            
               
That in this Solitary place, where none
            Will euer come to breathe a sigh or grone,
            Some remnant might be extant, of the true
            And faithfull loue, I euer tenderd you.
            Oh, rest in peace, deare friends, and let it be
            No pride to say the sometime part of me.
            What paine and anguish doth afflict the head,
            The heart and stomake, when the limbes are dead:
            So grieu'd, I kisse your graues: and vow to dye,
            A Foster-father to your memory.
            Farewell.
            So fastning my briefe to the Crosse, which was securely
wrapt vp in Lead: we presently tooke Boat and departed: and
neuer put foote more on that Iland. This Iland and all the
rest, (as likewise the maine) is a light white sand; couered
ouer with a white mosse, and full of shrubs and low bushes:
excepting some bare hils, and other patches. In these bare
places, the sand will driue with the wind like dust. It is very
full of trees, as Spruse and Iuniper: but the biggest tree I
saw, was but a foote and a halfe ouer. At our first comming
hither, we saw some Deare and kild one: but neuer any
since. Foxes, all the winter we saw many, and kild some
dozen of them: but they went all away in May. Beares we
saw but few, but kild none: we saw some other little beasts.
In May there came some fowle, as Duckes and Geese: of
which we kild very few. White Partridges we saw; but in
small quantities: nor had we any shot, to shoot at them. Fish
we could neuer see any in the Sea: nor no bones of fish on
the shoare side: excepting a few Cockle-shels: and yet nothing
in them neither. Other things remarkeable I haue before
mentioned.
         
      
      
         
         OVR DISCOVERY
and comming Home.
         
            
               Iuly, 1632.
            
            MVnday being the second of Iuly, we
were vp betimes: about Stowing
and fitting our Ship, and waying of
our Ankers, which when the last
was a trippe, wee went to prayer,
beseeching God to continue his mercies
to vs, and rendering him thanks
for hauing thus restored vs. Our Ship
we found no defect in; we had abundance
of such prouisions, as we brought out of England:
and we were in indifferent health, and did gather strength daily.
This being done, we wayed, and came cheerefully to sayle.
The winde at North-west, bad to get away. Wherefore we
stood ouer to Danby Iland, to take in more wood; and there
to be ready to take the opportunitie of a faire winde. I went
ashoare my selfe with the Boate: for that some of the company
had told me, they had seen some stakes the last yeer drouen
into the ground. When we came ashoare, whilest some
gatherd wood, I went to the place: where I found two stakes,
drouen into the ground about a foote and a halfe, and firebrands,
where a fire had beene made by them. I puld vp the

stakes, which were about the bignesse of my arme; and they
had beene cut sharpe at the ends, with a hatchet, or some
other good Iron toole, and driuen in as it were with the
head of it. They were distant about a stones-throw, from
the water side. I could not conceiue, to what purpose they
should be there set; vnlesse it were for some marke for boats.
This did augment my desire, to speake with the Saluages: for
without doubt they could haue giuen notice of some Christians,
with whom they had some commerce. About 4. in
the Euening, I returned aboord with a boats lading of wood:
and the winde something fauouring, we wayde; with our
lead seeking out a Channell amongst these perilous shoalds.
In the Euening, the winde opposing it selfe; we came to
Anker betwixt Charleton Iland, and that Iland we named
the last yeere, (in memory of that Honourable Gentleman
Master Thomas Carie, one of the Bed-chamber to the King)
Caries Iland: where we rid all night.
            The 3. at breake of day,3. we wayde with a bare winde, and
sounding vp and downe for a Channell, we were many times
in 5. and 4 fad. water. The winde larging vpon vs, we stood
away West: by noone, we saw all Ice to the North-ward
of vs. Indeauouring, therefore, to compasse about the Westerpoint
of Charleton Iland: and so to seeke to the South-ward:
We found it all shoalds, Rockes, and breaches. By 4.
in the afternoone, we saw the Western-land; but all full of
Ice: whereupon, as the wind fauoured vs, we stood alongst
it in sight to the North-ward.
            The fourth was calme, but so very thicke fogge withall,4.
that we could not see a Pistoll-shot about vs. Wherefore
we came to an Anker, and there rid all this day and the next
night.
            The fift,5. at three in the morning, we waide: but Ice being
all about vs, we knew not which way to turne vs now to
avoide telling the same thing 20 times: we were continually,
till the 22. so pestered and tormented with Ice; that it
would seeme incredible to relate it: sometimes we were so
blinded with fogge, that we could not see about vs: and being

now become wilfull in our indeauours, we should so
strike against the Ice, that the fore-part of the Ship would
cracke againe; and make our Cooke and others to runne vp all
amazed, and thinke the Ship had beene beaten all to pieces.
Indeed we did hourely strike such vnauoidable blowes,
that we did leaue the hatches open, and 20. times in a day,
the men would runne downe into the hold, to see if shee
were bulged.
            Sometimes, when we had made her fast in the night, to
a great piece of Ice; we should haue such violent stormes,
that our fastning would breake: and then the storme would
beate vs from piece to piece most fearefully: Other-while,
we should be fast inclosed amongst great Ice, as high as our
poope. This was made (as I haue formerly said) by one
piece running vpon another: which made it draw 8. or 10.
fad??? water. Besides which, the lower-most would rise from
vnderneath, and strike vs vnder the bulge, with pieces of
5. 6. yea of 8. tunne, that many times we haue pumpt cleere
water for an houre together, before we could make the
pumpe sucke??? Amongst these seuerall and hourely dangers,
I ouer-heard the men murmure; and say that they were happy
that I had buried: and that if they had a thousand pounds,
they would giue it, so they lay fairely by them: for we (say
they) are destined to starue vpon a piece of Ice. I was faine
to indure all this with patience: and to comfort them vp
againe, when I had them in a better humour.
            The 22. hauing beene vext with a storme all last night,22. and
this morning with a thicke fogge; we droue in 13. faddome
water. About noone, it cleer'd; and we saw the land: and at
the instant, had a good obseruation: whereby we knew it
to be Cape Henrietta Maria. I made the Master stand in with
it; and in the meane time we fitted a Crosse, and fastened the
Kings Armes, and the Armes of the City of Bristoll to it;
we came to an Anker within a mile of the shoare, in 6. fadd.
water: so we hoyst out the boate, and tooke our Armes and
our Dogs, and went ashoare. Vpon the most eminent place,
we erected the Crosse: and then seeking about, we soone

saw some Deere; and by and by more and more. We stole
to them with the best skill we had, and then put our Dogs
on them: but the Deere ranne cleere away from them at pleasure.
We tyred the Dogs, and wearied our selues, but to
no purpose: neither could we come to shoote at them. I
saw in all, about a dozen (old and young) very goodly beasts.
We tooke halfe a doozen young Geese, on the pooles, by
wading in to them; and so returned to our Boate vext, that
now we had found a place where there was refreshing, and
we could get none of it. Whereas, therefore, we had kept
our Dogs with a great deale of inconuenience aboord the
Ship, all the winter; and had pardoned them many misdemeanors,
(for they would steale our meate out of the steeping
tubs) in hope they might hereafter doe vs some seruice: and
seeing they now did not; and that there was no hope they
could hereafter: I caused them to be left ashoare. They were
a Dogge and a Bitch: Bucke Dogs, of a very good race.
The Dogge had a collar about his necke, which it may be
hereafter, may come to light. I did see no signe at all, of any
Saluages: nor could we finde any hearbs, or other refreshing
here.
            In the Euening, (being returned aboord) and the winde
blowing faire at South; I caused the Master to weight, and
come to saile, and to lose no time. For we did hope for an
open Sea to the North-west. This Cape hath a very shoald
point, that lies off it: which we indeauoured to compasse
about.
            Sayling therefore amongst shattered Ice, we came to very
shoald water, (4. and 5. faddome deepe) and could not auoyde
it. At length, standing North, the water deepened; but we
came withall amongst great pieces of Ice; which by reason
of some open water, there went a pretty sea. These hard
pieces of Ice, made a most fearefull noyse. It proued a faire
Moone-shine night: otherwise it had gone ill with vs. We
turned amongst this Ice, staying the Ship sometimes within
her length, of great pieces, as bad as Rockes: but by reason
we were often forst to beare vp, we did sagge vpon the

maine rand of Ice, and that we thought would it be worse
for vs; wee let fall an Anker, and stood all on the decks to
watch the Ices sheering of the Ship, (to and againe) to auoyd
it. Thus hauing poles and oares to fend it, we could not
keepe our selues so cleere, but many pieces came foule of vs.
We brake two of our great poles with it: which were made
to be handled by foure men, besides some other dammages. At
breake of day, we wayed; and sought all wayes to cleere our
selues of Ice: but it was impossible. I conceiue it impertinent
to relate euery particular dayes passages; which was
much alike to vs. Our endeauours were sometimes with our
sayles; giuing and receiuing 500. fearefull blowes in a day.
Sometimes, we would stop at an Anker, when we could get
a little open water: and so suffer the Ice to driue to Leeward:
Other-whiles, we should be inclosed amongst it; and then it
would so breake, and rise, and leape vp vnder vs; that we expected
to be beaten euery houre to pieces.
            Moreouer, wee should haue such stormes in the darke
nights, that would breake the moorings we had made fast to
some piece of Ice for securitie in the night season: and then
we should beat most dangerously from piece to piece till day-light,
that we could see to make her fast againe. I forbeare
to speake of thicke fogges which we had daily; which did
freeze our Rigging day and night: Besides all which, wee
should come into most vncertaine depths: sometimes 20.
faddome: next cast 10. next 15. then 9. Rocky foule ground.
The great deepe Ice withall, driuing on these vncertaine
depths, did so distract the tydes, and deceiue vs so much in
our accounts,30. that by the thirtieth we were driuen backe so
farre, to the Eastward, and to the Southward of the Cape;
that at fiue a clocke in the euening, it bare North-west of vs
some three leagues off, contrary to our expectations. With
all these mischiefes, our Ship is now becomne very leaky:
that we must pumpe euery halfe watch. Here I called a consultation:
and after consideration of all our experience, we
were all of the same opinion; that it was impossible to get to
the Northward, or to the Eastward; by reason of the Ice.

Wherefore I resolued vpon this course: When the winde
blew South, it would blow the Ice off the South shoare, then
we would seeke to get to the Westward, betwixt it and the
shoare. I must confesse that this was a desperate resolution:
for all the coast we knew to be shoald and foule ground, all
rocks, and stones: so that if the winde should shift to the
Northward, there would be (without Gods mercies) little
hope of vs. But here we must not stay: The nights grew
long; the cold so increased, that betwixt the pieces of Ice,
the Sea would be frozen. I caused the Ship to be fitted, and
places conuenient againe prepared to sinke her the second
time, if so be we were put to extremities. We presently put
our proiect in execution (the winde being at South) and got
about the shoalds of the Cape; standing then into the shoare-ward,
to get betwixt it and the Ice: we came into foure faddome
water (very foule rocky ground) thinking to come
to an Anker all night, and let the Ice driue to Leeward. But
still there was so much Ice betwixt vs and the shoare, that
we were faine to beare vp amongst it into deeper water, and
to let the Ship driue amongst it. The winde increasing, we endured
a most dangerous darke night of it. In the morning.
we fell to worke, to get the Ship againe out of the Ice into
some cleere water, which we saw West by South of vs.
Some of our company out vpon the Ice, to heaue her with
their shoulders: whilest others stood aboord with poles.
The rest stood to spill and fill the sayle. By nine in the morning,
we had gotten into some cleere water: and stood West
and by South; and into foure faddome water, foule ground.
But being not able to weather some rands of Ice, which did
driue; wee were faine to stand off againe, and (when the
euening grew darke) to come to an Anker.
            About midnight, there came a great piece of Ice, (which
we could not auoyd) athwart of our Cable; and made the
Ship driue and dragge her Anker. This droue her into shoald
water, it being very rocky and foule ground. We brought
the Cable to Capstang, and heau'd with such a courage, that
we heau'd home our Anker from vnder it. Thus we did

endeauour (the best we could) to keep our selues in eight and
ten faddome water. It then pleased God, that the wind blew
alongst the shoare: otherwise it had gone far worse with vs.
         
         
            
               August. 1632.
            
            The first of this moneth at breake of day, when we could
see a little about vs,1. we fell to struggle and striue againe with
the Ice; and to get in neerer to the shoare. There, by reason
the winde was opposite to come to an Anker, we let the Ice
driue to Leeward: hoping that there was a cleere Sea to the
Westward. The Ice droue very thicke vpon vs, and one piece
came foule of vs; which did touch our Spreet-sayle Yard,
and made the Ship driue: But we soone cleered our selues of
it. Then we wayed, and stood in neerer to the shoare: but
the water shoalded, and there were so many great rands of Ice
betwixt vs and the shoare, that there was no comming to an
Anker. So wee turned betwixt the Ice: many pieces of it
being aground in shoald water; and few pieces distant one
from the other a Cables length. This day, we saw two Sea
Morses on the Ice.
            The second in the morning,2. we were glad of the breake
of day: hauing most dangerously turn'd amongst the Ice all
night, and endured many a heauy blow. We stood in againe to
the shoare-ward; to see if we could get some cleere water:
for to the Northward it was all impassable Ice. We stood
into fiue aad foure faddome: but still all incompast with Ice.
So we stood off againe into deeper water: and in the Euening
we were inclosed amongst extraordinary great pieces.
It was a very thicke fogge withall: so that we made fast the
Ship to a great flat piece, and went to sleepe and refresh our
selues after our extreme paines taking.
            The third, fourth and fift,3. 4. & 5. wee were inclos'd amongst
very great Ice: and it blew such a storme of winde, that we
sometimes indeuouring to get forward to the Westward,
did strike such heauy blowes, that made all the forepart of
the Ship cracke againe. Then we would giue ouer working

and let her alone amongst it; but then the Ice would breake
and rise vnder vs, that would indanger as bad vs as the former.
Our ship doth make aboue a tun of water euery watch, which
we must pumpe out, beside our other labour. God thinke on
vs, and be mercifull to vs amongst all these dangers.
            The fift at noone,5. we were in Latitude 55. 30. The Cape
bearing off vs South-East, by East, some twelue leagues off.
And this is all we haue gotten, since the two and twentieth
of Iuly. All night it blew a violent gale of wind, at West,
North-West: and about midnight, our hawser (by which
we had made fast to a piece of Ice) broke, and we lost 14.
faddome of it. We beat all night most fearefully, being tost
from piece to piece, because that in the darke we durst not
venture our men to goe forth on the Ice, for feare of losing
them.
            All the sixth,6. the storme indured, and droue vs againe with
the Ice, almost to the Cape.
            The seuenth was the most comfortablest day wee had,7.
since we came out of our wintering place; the wind came
vp faire at East; and we got (although with our former inconueniences
and dangers) neerer to the shoare, and into
some open water, making good way to the West-ward.
Moreouer, our leake now stopt of its owne accord: so that
now we pumpt but little. We sayld all night; keeping good
watch on the forecastell: bearing vp for one, and looffing
for another.
            Thus did we the eighth also, but then the wind shifting
to the North-west, it droue the Ice on the shoare: and
we came to an Anker, in eight faddom water. The maine
Ice, we had some two mile to windward of vs: but the
set of the tyde kept it off from vs. At noone we were in
Latitude 55. 34. In the Euening, a range of Ice droue vpon
vs, which made vs weigh, and stand in neerer the
shoare, into sixe faddom, and there to come to an Anker.
The wind increasing about midnight, the Ship did driue, and
was quickely in fiue faddom water: wherefore wee let fall
our Shoot-Anker; and both held her. But that that troubled

vs, was, that was expected euery minute, when the maine
Ice would come vpon vs: and then there would be no hope,
but to be put ashoare.
            The ninth,9. in the morning, we waide our second Anker:
the Ice being within lesse then a mile of vs. About eight in
the morning, a point of it came foule of vs: which we preuented,
by waying, and came to an Anker in three faddom
and a halfe water. The wind continued North North-West,
which was in on the shoare. This morning, I caused all our
empty Caske to be fild with water, and the Ship to be left
vnpumpt: and the places lookt to, that we had prepared to
sinke her. For we were at present in as apparent danger, as
any time this voyage: and (to our great griefes) it was all
foule rocky ground. The danger of this was, if we made
fast to a piece of Ice that drew deepe water; then, as soone
as it came to ground on these rockes, it would breake all to
pieces, and betray vs to our destruction. About noone, there
came foule of vs the point of a range of Ice; which we resolued
to indure the extremity of, with an Anker: thinking
to ride, and breake through it, we now perceiuing some open
water beyond it. Thrusting therefore, and fending with
our poles; at last a great piece came thwart our hawser, and
there went a pretty Sea amongst it. The Ship did now fall
vpon it so violently, that I expected euery blow, she would
beate out her bowes. At length, she did driue with it, so that
I thought the Cable had bin broken. We brought it to Capstang
to heaue it in: but found that our Shoote-Anker was
broken in the middle of the shanke. We presently set our
sayles thereupon: indeuouring that way to edge in amongst
the Ice off of this perilous shoare. It pleased God to fauour
our labour so, that by eight in the Euening wee got off into
seuen faddom: and a darke night comming on, we made fast
to the biggest piece we could find. It blew fairely all night:
but about midnight, the wind came vp at North, which was
more on the shoare then before.10. By breake of day, on the
tenth, we were driuen into foure faddom, very foule ground:
so that the lead did fall off the rocks three or foure foote,

we set our sailes, and vsed our vttermost indeuours to edge
off. Some of vs went vpon the Ice to hale her: others stood
with poles to thrust by night. At night we had gotten off,
into eight faddom: and made fast to the biggest piece we
could find. If any man should aske why we now kept so
neere to the shoare, in this continuall danger: I answer; Because
that in the offing, the Ice was so extraordinary thicke,
that we could make no way, any way through it. Moreouer,
when we were in that great thicke Ice, and that the winde
came vp faire at South or South-East or East, we could not
get out of it. Wherefore we chose to runne this aduenture;
and so preuent and ouercome all dangers with Gods assistance
and our extreme labour.
            The eleuenth in the morning was a thicke fog:11. yet there
sprung vp a gale of wind at East: and we made in for the
shoare.
            From the eleuenth till the foureteenth, the winde continued
faire: and we made all the saile we could (night and day)
as the Ice would suffer vs. We had the shoare in sight by
day, on one side, and the Ice within two miles, on the other:
and we saild amongst disperst pieces; luffing for one,
and bearing vp for another.
            The 14. at noone,14. we were in Latitude 57. 55. In the Euening,
we were imbayed in Ice; and stood S. W. to cleere our
selues of it, but could not. But seeing from top-mast head,
cleere water ouer it, we put into it: but there rose a very
thicke fogge, and night came on withall, that we were faine to
fast to a piece of Ice, expecting day and better weather.
            The 15. in the morning, (although the fogge was very
thicke) we indeauoured to get out of the Ice, and stood away
West: but within 2. houres the water shoalded from
40. faddome to 25. whereby we knew that we had the shoalding
of the Western-shoare. Then we shapte our course to
the Northward; the fogge continuing so thicke, that we
could not see a Pistoll-shot about vs. We had not stood
this way 2. houres, but we heard the rut of the Ice a-head of
vs, which made the most hideous noyse, of any we had

heard this voyage. We hal'd our tackes aboord, and stood
to the West-ward, in this day darknesse: hearing of it sometimes,
and sometimes seeing of it: which was very large,
deepe, and high Ice, aboue the water. We weathered it all,
except some few pieces, and got into open water. About
Sunne-set, there came a sudden gust at N. N. W. and before
we could handle our sayles, it was with vs, and put vs to
some trouble. It dallied with vs by gusts, till 9. a clocke: and
then it fell into a most violent storme. We considered where
we might haue the cleerest drift: and so tooke in all, and let
her driue, her head to the shoare-ward. Before mid-night,
the water shoalded on vs, to 15. fadd. Then we turned her
head to the Eastward: and set our maine Course low set, but
as much as she could indure. The water deepned but little;
and we knew that we were on those rockie shoalds, which
we strooke on the last yeere. God be mercifull to vs. Here
was the first great breaking Sea that we had this yeere.
            The 16.16. in the morning, we were driuen to a great Rand
of Ice; to avoyde which, we set our fore-course too: and
stood to the shoare-ward, in 13. fad. water: and then about
againe. We stood in, a mile into the Ice: but there went such
a great swelling Sea in it, that it was not indurable: so we
stood out againe. About 3. a clocke in the afternoone, the
storme broke vp; and blew faire at N. W. which prooued
good for vs: for we had not drift for 4. houres: Besides,
it was but 2. leagues betwixt the shoalds and the Ice. We set
all our sayles, and indeauoured to weather the Ice: but in the
Euening we were still pestered with it. By mid-night, we
knew not which way to turne; nor what to doe: so we
tooke in all our sayles, and let her driue amongst it. The Ice
beat vs on euery side: for there went amongst it a very
great full Sea.
            The 17.17. in the morning, when we could see about vs; we
were in the middest of the Ice: but with the last storme it
was all broken into mammocks, as big as a boate of 3. or 4.
Tunnes, which did giue vs many a heauy blow in the darke
night. If this storme had taken vs amongst it, it had beaten

vs all to pieces, without Gods miraculous preseruation. We
made sayle, and indeauoured to cleere our selues of it to the
North-ward, which by 8. in the morning, we had done.
            We then went to prayer, and gaue God hearty thankes,
that had deliuered vs out of it. For we were hourely, for the
space of sixe weekes, as it were in the Iawes of death: yea
neuer any (that I haue heard of) haue beene so long, in such
long nights, vpon a foule shoald shoare, tormented with Ice,
as we haue now beene. At noone we were in Latitude
58. 20.
            Now as touching the dissolution or ruining of the Ice; we
found that this storme had torne and shattered this Rande
of Ice, which was on the outside: although it must haue a
long time, to worke into the maine body of it. I haue in
Iuly, and in the beginning of August, taken some of the Ice
into the Ship; and cut it square, 2. foote, and put it into
the boate, where the Sunne did shine on it with a very strong
reflexe about it. And notwithstanding the warmth of the
Ship: (for we kept a good fire) and all our breathings, and
motions; it would not melt, in 8. or 10. dayes.
            It was our practice when we should be two dayes together
fast to a piece of Ice, to set markes on it, to see how
it did consume: but it yeelded vs small hope of dissoluing.
We could not in that time, perceiue any diminution by the
sinking of it or otherwise. Neuerthelesse, I thinke that
it is ruined with stormes, or consumed with heate some
yeeres: or else the Bay would be fild choke-full: But I
confesse, that these secrets of nature are past my apprehension.
            Being out of it (but no otherwaies then that we yet saw
it from off the deckes, all to the Eastward) I ordered the Master
to stere away North and by East, keeping the shoalding
of the Wester-shoare.
            The 18.18. at noone, we were in Latitude 59. 30.
            The 19.19. we continued our course betwixt the N. N. E. and
the N. by E. and at noone were in Lat. 61. 7. some 12.
leagues off the shoare. I ordered the Master, to shape his

course North-East, to looke to that place betwixt Caries
Swans-nest, and Ne vltra.
            The 20.20. we were in Latitude 61. 45. This day we saw
some few Seales about the Ship.
            The one and twentieth the water shoalded; so that we21.
made account we did approach the land: but about noone,
the wind came vp at N. E. our direct opposite. We looft as
neere it as we could, and as it larg'd, we came to stand East,
and East and by North.
            The two and twentieth,22. we fell with the land to the
West-ward of Caries Swans-nest: Where we had forty
faddome, three leagues off. We stood in, within a league
of the shoare, into thirteene faddome: and seeing the land
to the South-ward of vs, we compast about it: it being
Caries Swans-nest: which is in Latitude 52. degr.
00. Minutes.
            All the 23.23. we sayled North-East; and for the most part
in sight of land.
            The foure and twentieth at noone,24. (by Iudgement) we
were in Latitude 63. 30. hauing sayld a North-East course.
All this day was a very thicke fog: which about one a
clocke, cleerd a little: so that I expected to see the land. Some
of our men being better sighted, spyed it out about some two
leagues off from vs. I knew it could be no other then Nottingham
Iland: though it were something contrary to the
expectation of our best Marriners. We stood into it to make
it. It was the North end of it: and it bare off vs, due East.
I was soone assured of it; and I ordered the Master to shape
his course North-West, and by North. Both he and others
were vnwilling: but without much adoe, submitted themselues:
(how loth so euer) for that it was so very foule thicke
weather. The reasons of my resolution were these: The
time of the yeere was far spent; and the discommodities of
Winter came vpon vs: and therefore would I make the shortest
way, betwixt the lands already discouered. If I found an
open Sea, I had my desire, and did then intend to proceed to
the vttermost of our power: if we met with the land, I

should then finish the discouery: it being not passing fifteene
leagues from land to land, and not passing tenne leagues from
Nottingham Iland, to the maine of the North shoare. We
made what sayle we could; it blowing a very stiffe gale of
wind vntill eight in the Euening: then it began to blow
fiercely: and we tooke in our topsayles, and stood vnder
our two courses and Bonnets. At nine, it blew a violent
storme at South, South-East, so that we tooke in our fore-saile,
and let her driue North-West. All the night it continued
an extraordinary storme: so that we heaued the Leade,
euery halfe watch: But the Ship did driue so fast, that she
would be past the Leade, before there was twenty faddom
of line out, all the night being exceeding cold withall.
            The fiue and twentieth,25. the storme continued in his vttermost
malice, and did so perplexe vs, that there were but few
that did sleepe or eate a bit these twenty foure houres. About
sixe a clocke in the afternoone, the Storme began to
slaken: yet blew there a fierce gale of wind betwixt the South
and South-West. We stood West, North-West, and made
a North-West way, when suddenly the Sea became very
smooth. We reasoned thereupon amongst our selues, what
might be the cause of it. VVe all thought it, to be the Lee-ward
tyde; nothing doubting what afterwards we encountered.
The Ship had very quicke way in this smooth water.
            The sixe and twentieth, by two a clocke in the morning,
we were suddenly come in amongst the Ice: and it pleased
God,26. that the Moone at the instant gaue vs so much light, that
we could see a little about vs. We would haue staid the Ship,
but it was so thicke to wind-ward, and so neere vs, that we
durst not. Wee then bore vp in this vnexpected accident;
and (I verily beleeue) did not scape striking, the length
of a foote, against the Ice as hard as rockes, two or three
times: the Shippe now hauing way, after twelue leagues
a watch. Then wee stood close by a wind to the Eastward;
expecting day, that wee might see about vs. Wee could
from top-mast head see the Ice to the North North-West,
the North-west, and so round about by the South, to the East,

and some there was to Leeward of vs. It was all flat sound
Ice, in maine rands: and the Sea as smooth as a well amongst
it. This strooke vs all into a dumpe: whereupon I called a
consultation of my Associates: namely, Arthur Price, Master:
William Clements, Lieutenant; Iohn Whittered, Masters
Mate; Nathaniel Bilson, Chirurgion; and Iohn Palmer,
Boateswayne: requiring them to aduise and counsell mee,
how to prosecute our businesse to effect. These all went together,
and reasoned amongst themselues; and then brought
me their opinions in writing, vnder their hands:
            Videlicet, Our aduice is, that you repaire homeward, from
this present twentie sixth: and that for these reasons. First,
for that the nights are long and so extreme cold withall; that
we can hardly handle our sayles, and riggings. Secondly, the
times are now subiect to stormy and gusty weather: as witnesseth
the present season: it hauing continued a storme euer
since the twentie fourth, and doth yet continue, no weather
to discouer in. Thirdly, we doubt whether Hudsons Straights
be so cleere of Ice, that it may be passable in conuenient time:
(winter comming now on apace) before we be frozen vp:
seeing the Ice lyes here all ouer the Sea in rands and ranges.
Fourthly, wee must haue a set of faire weather, to passe the
Straight; which we may stay a long time; for, if we neglect the
first opportunity. Fiftly, for that our Ship is very leaky, so that
in foule weather we are faine to pumpe euery glasse: which
is great labour. Moreouer, we know her to be so sorely bruised
with rocks, and blowes of the Ice; that shee is no more
to be aduentur'd amongst it, but in sauing of our liues homewards.
Besides all this, our men grow very weake and sickly,
with extreme labour.
            Sixthly, the season of the yeere is so farre spent, that we
can expect no other weather, then we haue had; both lately
and at present: That is to say, snow and fogge; freezing our
rigging, and making euery thing so slippery, that a man can
scarce stand: And all this, with the winde Southerly; which
if it should come to the Northward; then we are to expect
farre worse. Seuenthly and lastly, that the Ice lyes all in thicke

rands and ranges, in the very way we should goe: as you
and all men here may see. And therefore wee conclude, as aforesaid;
That there is no possibilitie of proceeding further:
wherefore we here counsell you to returne homeward: hoping
that God will giue vs a fauourable passage, and returne
vs home safe into our natiue countreys: If we take time, and
not tempt him too farre, by our wilfulnesse.
            Indeed most of these reasons were in view; and I could
not tell what to say to oppose them: no nor any reason could
I giue, how we might proceed further: wherefore (with a
sorrowfull heart, God knowes) I consented, that the helme
should bee borne vp, and a course shapte for England:
well hoping, that his Maiestie would graciously censure of
my endeauours, and pardon my returne. And although wee
haue not discouered populous kingdomes, and taken speciall
notice of their Magnificence, power, and policies, brought
samples home of their riches and commodities: pryed into
the mysteries of their trades, and traffique: nor made any
great fight against the enemies of God and our Nation: yet
I wish our willingnesse in these desart parts may be acceptable
to our Readers. When we bore vp Helme, we were in latitude
65. 30. at least; North-west and by North, from Nottingham
Iland. Some were of an opinion, that we were further
to the Northward: but by reason it was by Iudgement,
I chose to set downe the lesser distance.
            The twentie seuenth,27. the winde came vp at North-west:
with which winde we could not haue gone on our designe.
That winde made no great swelling Sea. By noone, we were
athwart of Cape Charles: so that we went in betwixt that
Cape, and Mill Ilands. The last night it did snow very much;
& was very cold: so that all our rigging & sayles were frozen,
and all the land couered ouer with snow. And here, (sithence I
haue formerly spoken that it snowes very much) it will not
be amisse to consider of the reasons of it. When I was vpon
Charleton Iland, (our wintering place) and in Iune, when
the snow was cleereliest gone off the ground; I haue in the

nights, (& some of them following the hottest dayes) obserued,
whether there fell any dew or no: but I could neuer perceiue
any, & (vnder correction of the learned) from mosse and
sand, little (mee thoughts) was to be expected. Now, of
what was exhald from the snowy Ice, and cold Sea; could
there probably be returned but the like againe. Generally, we
continued on our course, blinded with foggie and durtie
weather; and that, intermixt with snow, and frost; amongst
disperst pieces of Ice: many of them higher then
our Top-mast head.
            With great varietie of winds, we were also driuen within
three leagues of both shoares: so that the last of this
moneth, we were in the narrow of the Straight: which
is about fifteene leagues ouer: the South shoare was much
pestred with Ice.
         
         
            
               September. 1632.
            
            The first,1. & 2. and second, we continued our endeuour to get on
our way. The third in the euening, as the weather cleered
vp; we did see the South end of the Iland of Resolution.
            These three dayes and nights had beene extreme cold,3.
with fogge and frost: insomuch that our men in the euening,
could hardly take in our Top-sayles and Spreet-sayle. We
haue sayled thorow much mountainous Ice; farre higher then
our Top-mast head. But this day we sayled by the highest
that I euer yet saw: which was incredible, indeed, to be related.
Now as the winde comes Easterly, wee feele another
Sea, out of the Ocean, and the Ship labours with another
motion, then she hath done with any that euer we obserued,
to come out of the Westward.
            From the third to the eighth,8. we had varietie of winds;
and were gotten cleere out of the Straights: but were now
comne into such a tumbling Sea, (the weather durtie and
gustie, and by interims calme againe) that the Ship did so labour,
and rowle, that wee thought verily shee would haue

rowled her Masts by the boord. This made her so leaky, that
we were faine to pumpe euery glasse: yea, her seames did
so open aloft, that we lay all wet in her.
            This was the last day that wee saw any Ice. The winde
now fauouring vs; we made all the haste we could homeward.
By the way, (hauing endeauoured, obserued, and experimented
some things in my vnfortunate voyage) I perfected
vp my said obseruations: which being after commanded
to publish; I here most submissely offer vnto the Iudicious
Readers: and raine our priuate opinion withall, concerning
the faiseablenesse of the Action intended; which was to finde
a passage into the South Sea.
            What hath beene long agoe fabled by some Portingales,
that should haue comne this way out of the South Sea: the
meere shaddowes of whose mistaken Relations haue comne
to vs: I leaue to be confuted by their owne vanitie. These
hopes haue stirred vp from time to time, the more actiue
spirits of this our Kingdome, to research that meerely imaginary
passage. For mine owne part, I giue no credit to them
at all; and as little to the vicious, and abusiue wits of later
Portingals and Spaniards: who neuer speake of any difficulties:
as shoald water, Ice, nor sight of land: but as if they
had beene brought home in a dreame or engine. And indeed
their discourses are found absurd: and the plots, (by which
some of them haue practised to deceiue the world) meere
falsities: making Sea where there is knowne to be maine
land: and land, where is nothing but Sea.
            Most certaine it is, that by the onely industry of our owne
Nation, those Northerne parts of America haue beene discouered,
to the Latitude of 80. degrees, and vpwards. And
it hath beene so curiously done, (the labours of seuerall
men being ioyned together) that the maine land hath beene
both seene and searcht; and they haue brought this supposed
passage to this passe; that it must be to the North, of sixty
sixe degrees of Latitude. A cold Clyme, pestered with Ice,
and other discommodities, and where the Spaniards dispositions,

and their weake Speeke Ships, can hardly long indure
it. And withall, it is thus knowne, that the entrance
of Hudsons Straights is but 15. leagues broad: in the middle
not so much. And betwixt Salisbury Iland, and the maine;
that it is but 8. leagues. Then proceeding to the Northwards,
towards the fore-mentioned Latitude: it is but 15. leagues
from mayne to mayne. This in length, is but about a hundred
and forty leagues: as may more plainely appeare by the
Mappe. Most infinitely pestered withall it is with the Ice,
vntill August, and some yeeres not passable then: yea I beleeue
the straight is neuer cleere of Ice thorowly.
            Now most probable it is, that there is no passage: And
that for these reasons following.
            First, that there is a constant Tyde flood and ebbe, setting
into Hudsons Straights: the flood still comming from the
East-ward: which as it proceedes, (correspondent to the
distance,) it alters his time of full sea. This also entering
into Bayes, and broken ground, it becomes distracted, and
reuerses with halfe tydes.
            Secondly, here is no small fish; as Cod, &c. and very
few great ones, which are rarely to be seene. Nor are there
any bones of Whales, Sea-horses, or other great fish, to be
found on the shoare: nor any drift-wood.
            Thirdly, that we found the Ice in the Latitude of 65. 30.
to be lying all ouer the sea in randes: and I am most certaine,
that the shoalds and shoald-Bayes are the mother of it. Had
there now beene any Ocean beyond it, it would haue beene
broke all to pieces: for so we found it comming thorow the
Straight into the Sea, to the Eastward.
            Fourthly, the Ice seekes his way to the Eastward, and
so driues out at Hudsons Straight: which I haue often obserued
being aland, vpon the Iland of Resolution, and driuing amongst
the Ice in the Straight.
            Now admit there were a passage, yet is it knowne, that
it is partly narrow, for a hundred and forty leagues, and to
be infinitely pestered with Ice withall: as euery one haue found,

who haue gone that way. Comparing therefore some obseruation
taken at Bantam, Gulolo, and at Firando in Iapan:
and the distance betwixt Iapan and the Wester-part of Califurnia:
with the obseruations taken at Charleton Iland, (referring
all to the Meridian of London) and then the distance
betwixt the Meridians of Cape Charles, and the Westerpart
of Califurnia, will be found to be about 500. leagues,
in the Latitude of 66. 00. where yet the Meridians incline
very much together.
            To this may be added, that neere about Cape Charles, the
variation is 29 degrees to the West: which is a probable argument,
that there is much land to the Westward: and that
this straight must be very long, and that you haue no time to
passe it but in August and September: when the nights are
so long, and the weather so cold, that it will not bee
indurable.
            Adde to this, That neither can any great Ships, which are
fit for carrying of Marchandize, indure the Ice, and other discommodities:
without extraordinary danger.
            Moreouer, a thousand leagues is sooner sayled to the Southward,
and about the Cape de Bona Speranza, (where the winds
are constant) and that with safety, then a hundred in these
seas, where you must dayly runne the hazzard of losing
Ship and liues. Put hereunto, that comfort for the sicke,
or refreshing for your men, here is none to be had in these
quarters.
            Towards the latter end of August, and in September, the
weather growes tempestuous, and the winds incline to be
Westerly, that there will be but small hope of performing
your voyage this way.
            But let vs (by way of imagination onely) inlarge this
Straight, in this Latitude; and free it of Ice: yet what aduantage,
in speedy performance, will be gotten by this passage,
if the winds be withall considered? To Iapan, China,
and the Northerne parts of Asia, it may be the neerer cut:
but in Nauigation, the farthest way about, is well knowne,

in fewer dayes to be performed, yea with lesser paines, and
more safety of Ship and goods.
            Againe; to the East Indies, and other parts, where we
haue the greatest Commerce and imployment of shipping;
the other way is as neere. What benefit of Trade might
haue beene obtained in those Northerne parts of Asia, I
will not presume to speake of: holding that there is a great
difference betwixt those parts, and the Northerne parts of
America; whereas I am sure that there is none in any place
where I haue beene, all this voyage.
            The two and twentieth of October,22. we arriued in the
Rode of Bristoll: hauing beene hindered and crost with much
contrary tempestuous windes and weather. The Ship being
brought into Harbour, and halde dry aground to looke to
her: it was there found; that all her Cut-water and Sterne
were torne and beaten away, together with fourteene foote
of her Keele; much of her sheathing cut away: her bowes
broken and bruised, and many timbers crackt within boord:
and vnder the Star-boord bulge, a sharpe Rocke had cut
thorow the sheathing, the planke, and an inch and a halfe
into a timber that it met withall. Many other defects there
were besides, so that it was miraculous how this vessell
could bring vs home againe. Being all here arriued; we went
all to Church, and gaue God thankes for his preseruation
of vs amidst so many dangers. I very well know, that what
I haue here hastily written, will neuer discourage any noble
spirit, that is minded to bring this so long tryed Action
to absolute effect. And it is likely withall, that there
be some, who haue a better vnderstanding, and a surer way
of prosecuting of it, then my selfe haue. To whose designes
I wish a happy successe. And if they doe but make a reuiew
of what hath beene done, and giue more certaine Coelestiall
obseruations, Hydrographicall descriptions, or exacter practice
in Nauigation: it will be a most commendable labour. For
although I haue spent some yeeres of my ripest age, in procuring
vaine intelligence from forraine Nations: and haue

trauailed vnto diuers Honourable and Learned personages of
this kingdome, for their instructions; haue bought vp whateuer
I could find in print, or manuscript, and what plot or paper
soeuer conducing to this businesse, that possibly I could
procure; and haue serued voluntary besides; and spent some
time in rendring a relation (since my comming home) and
expended withall of my owne monies, in my foresaid indeauours,
and in furnishing of extraordinary necessaries, aboue
two hundred pounds in ready money: yet I repent not my
selfe, but take a great deale of comfort and ioy, in that
I am able to giue an account (in some reasonable
way) of those parts of the world; which
heretofore I was not so well
satisfied in.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
         THE COPIE OF THE
Letter I left at CHARLETON,
fastened to the Crosse the first of
Iuly, 1632.
         
         BE it knowne to any that shall haply arriue here, on
this Iland of Charleton: That whereas our Soueraigne
Lord Charles the first, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, &c. hauing
a desire to be certified, whether there were any passage, or
not, by the North-west or Northwestward, thorow these
Territories, into the South Sea: Some of the better-minded
Merchants, of the Worshipfull Company of Merchant-aduenturers
of the Citie of Bristoll, to satisfie his Maiestie therein;
did voluntarily offer to set forth a conuenient Ship for
that purpose, well man'd, victualed, and furnished with all
other necessaries. This free offer of theirs was not only commended;
but graciously accepted of his Maiestie. Whereupon,
they fitted and furnished foorth a Ship, called the
Henrietta Maria, of the burthen of seuentie Tuns, victualed
for eighteene moneths A number thought conuenient to
mannage such a businesse, was twentie two, whereof nineteene
were choiceable men, two yonkers, and my vnworthy
selfe their Commander. All which, the Bristow Merchants
did most iudiciously and bountifully accommodate,
and had in a readinesse, the first of May, 1631.
         The third of May, we began our Voyage out of the Rode
of Bristoll; commonly called Kings Rode: Passing about the
Cape Cleere of Ireland, vpon many courses, but reduced to a
West North-west, we sayled along: and vpon the 4. of Iune,
wee made the land of Groynland to the Northward of Cape
Farewell: where for the space of two dayes, we were dangerously
ingagde amongst the Ice. Being cleere of it, we doubled
Cape Farewell to the Southward, and so continued our

course to the Westward; continually sayling and thrusting the
Ship thorow much Ice. The 19. of Iune, we made the Iland of
Resolutio??: & endeuouring to co??passe about it to the Southward,
we were taken with a strong Westerly wind, which droue the
Ice, and it vs, vpon the shoare. In that distresse, (seeing it was
broken grounds and maine inlets into it,) I sent the Shallop to
seek & sound a place, for our refuge; but when she was departed,
she was in as great danger as we: and could not returne to
vs, by reason of the Ice. We being now driuen very neere the
rocks, were faine to set our Sayles, and force the Ship into an opening:
aduenturing her amongst vnknowne dangers, to auoyd
apparent; before we could moore her in a place (as we thought)
safe from danger. The 22. of Iune (this Inlet being full of Ice,)
that Ice vpon the ebbe, so Iambde one piece into another, that
it altred the ordinary course of it, & it came vpon the Ship, and
put her against the rocks: notwithstanding our vtmost resistance.
As the water ebd away, the Ship hung by the Keele vpon
a rocke; and heeld to the Offing. As soone as we perceiued this,
we made fast some Hawsers to her Masts, and to the rocks, to
hold her vpright. But all in vaine; shee sunke still, as the water
ebb'd away: so that she was so turned ouer, that we could not
stand in her. Hereupon, we got all vpon a piece of Ice, looking
vpon her, & praying God to be mercifull to vs. The rocke that
she hung vpon, was a little abaft the maine Mast; which made
her hang after the head: and shee sunke ouer so much, that the
Portlasse of the Forecastell was in the water. At length, it pleased
God, the flood came; before it had ebd so low as the tyde
before and after, by a foote: and the Ship rose, and was safe and
sound. And thus were we miraculously deliuered. With the
first winde, we proceeded to the Westward: continually being
pestred with so much Ice, that it was about the middle of Iuly,
before we could attaine to Sir Dudly Digges Iland. And here
I was put to my consideration: for whereas by my directions,
I was to search especially two places; one from Digges
Iland to the Northward; and fayling there, to goe to the
Checks and Hubberts Hope, and so to search it to the Southward;

I now finding the Sea much pestred with Ice in the
latitude of 64. 00. and as farre as we could see to the Northward;
and that the time was so farre spent, as that before I
could do any thing that way, it would be Aug. & then as much
trouble to returne againe to Digges Iland: and that by that
time, the yeere would be so farre spent, the nights so long and
cold; that I feard I should be forced with shame to returne
into England againe that yeere. Wherefore I tooke my way
to the Westward, by Mansfields Iland; on which I landed
twice, still hindred and incumbred with Ice. Thence I proceeded
to the Westward; hoping for an open Sea in the Bay.
We were there more troubled with Ice, then in any place before:
so that it was the eleuenth day of August, before we
had sight of the Western land; which we made in latitude
59. 30. something to the Southward of the Checkes. Wee
were not able to attaine thither, by reason of the contrary
winds and Ice: but were obseruant of the currant of the
tydes: which after, by experience, we found to come from
the Northward. We coasted alongst the shoare, in sight of
land; and in 10. faddome water, to the Southward: and
entred that Inlett, which heretofore was called Hubberts
Hope: which was the very place, where the passage should
be, as it was thought by the vnderstandingest and learnedest
intelligencer of this businesse in England. We sayld to the
very bottome of it, into three faddom water: and found it
to be a Bay of some 18. or 19. leagues deepe. From thence
we proceeded to the Southward, in sight of land for the most
part; and although I was as carefull to keepe the lead alwaies
going (it blowing a fresh gale of winde, and a pretty bigge
Sea) our depth 8. 9. 10. faddome: yet before the lead was
vp, the Ship strook vpon a flat rocke: (she then being vnder
foresayle, fore top-sayle, maine top-sayle, and Spreetsayle)
and gaue three fore knocks, and got ouer it. Being past this
danger, we proceeded, and past by Port Nelson. Finding the
land trend to the Eastward, wee began our discouery of it
more carefully: because that no man (that euer I could heare

or reade of) did euer see this land before. Wee stood into
sixe and fiue faddome: for it is very low land, and trends for
the most part East South-east, and East by South.
         The seuen and twentieth of August, I entred vpon it, and
in the name of the Merchants Aduenturers of Bristoll, tooke
possession of it, to his Maiesties vse; naming it, The New
South-west Principalitie of Wales. I brought from the land,
some small trees and herbs, and killed diuers sorts of fowle;
in signe of seysure, which I brought aboord. Not long after,
(being put backe to the Westward with contrary winds)
we spake with Captaine Fox, in a Ship of his Maiesties, set
forth for the same purpose that we were: I inuited him aboord,
and entertained him with such fare, as we had taken in
this new discouered land: and made him relation of all our
endeauours: The like did he to vs, and withall told vs, that
he had beene in Port Nelson: where he had put vp a Shallop,
and found there many things which Sir Thomas Button had
left there. The next day, he departed from vs, and stood to
the Westward; and we neuer saw him since. His Ship, He,
and all his Company, were very well. We continued our
discouery to the Eastward, and came to the Easter point,
which is in latitude 55. 06. which we named it Cape Henrietta
Maria. There the land trends to the Southward, and we followed
it in sight; but were put off with foule weather;
which being ouer-blowne, we stood in againe for the Westershoare
(that we might leaue no part vnseene) and followed
it againe to latitude 54. 40. The second time wee also put off,
with like foule weather: which made vs stand to the Eastward.
In this way we past by some Ilands, and happened amongst
broken grounds, and rocks; in latitude 53. 30. where
wee came to an Anker, and sheltred our selues some few
dayes, shifting Rodes. Now the Winter began to come on,
and the nights to be long and cold; that amongst these dangerous
places, wee were faine to spend the day to looke for
securitie for the night. Here, by misfortune, our Ship came
aground; and that amongst great stones, as bigge as a mans

head; where shee did beate for the space of fiue houres,
most fearefully. In this time, we lightened her, and carried
some of our things ashoare: so that by the great fauour of
God, we got her off againe, whereupon we named this
Iland, the Iland of Gods fauour. After that againe, amongst those
Rockes, we were put to many extremities. At length, (hauing
a gentle Southerly winde) we stood alongst the Eastershoare,
to the Northward: now looking for a conuenient
place to winter in. And here againe, were we assaulted with
a violent storme, in which we lost our Shallop, and were
driuen amongst diuers dangers: and seeing an opening betwixt
two Ilands, we ventered to goe in, in very foule
weather. We found it to be a very good Sound, and there
we came to an Anker. We landed on one of them, which
we named the Lord Westons Iland; and man'd out our old
Ship boate vpon it. The other Iland we named my Lord
of Bristols Iland. Parting from hence, wee stood to the
South-ward, to looke for a wintering place: because the time
of discouery was past for this yeere. Many were our troubles
amongst these Ilands, shoalds, and broken grounds;
which made vs straine our ground tackle for life, many a
time.
         The 6. of October, we arriued in this Bay; it seeming a
very likely place to finde a Harbour in: but searching the likeliest
places, we found it all so shoald flats and Rocks, and stony
by the shoare side; that we could by no meanes bring our
Ship neere the shoare, but were forced to ride a league off,
in 3. faddome and a halfe water.
         The winter came on apace, the weather proued tempestuous;
and the cold so multiplied, that our sailes froze in lumps
to the yards, vnmanuable. Neither could our onely boate goe
from the Ship, by reason of the weather. About the middle
of October, I caused a house to be made ashoare where our
sicke men might the better recouer: but alwayes with an intent
to take it downe, if we found other-where, a place for
our Ship. I sent likewise men afoote (seeing the boate could

not goe) to discouer the Iland, and to see if they could find
some Creeke or Coue; but all in vaine, we spent the time
with hope of fairer weather, till now the Cables began to
freeze in the house, and the Ship to be frozen ouer with the
sprewe of the Sea: so that we were faine to shouell the snow
off our decks. Moreouer, the water began so to congeale by
the shoare side, that the boate could hardly get ashoare. Yet
for all that, if the wind blew N. W. there went a very great
surfe on the shoare, and such a great Sea in the Bay, that
there was no bringing of our Ship aground. Besides this, she
would haue then laine open to the E. and S. E. and S. and indeed
the neerest land, all about that way, was 2. leagues off.
Hereupon, we continued out the extremity, at an Anker.
         The 29. of Nouember, the Ice came about vs on all sides,
and put vs from our ground tackle, and would haue driuen vs
out of the Bay vpon Rockes and shoalds (where vndoubtedly
we had perished) but that by Gods great goodnesse, it proued
so warme a day (the winde at S.) that suddenly we
brought vp some sayle, and hoyst it vp with ropes, and so
forst her ashoare; where shee beat all that night very sorely.
The Ship being now grounded and quiet, wee considered
what was best to doe with her, and resolued to sinke her:
but the next tyde, before we had any of our prouisions ashoare,
the winde came N. W. so that the Ship beat most
fearefully. We got all our dry prouisions vp to the vpper
decke, and made a hole to sinke her: but before she was
sunke, she beat so extraordinarily, that we all thought she
had beene foundered. Being sunke downe so low, that the
water came on the vpper decke, we tooke our boate and
went all ashoare, in such pittifull cold weather, that we were
all so white frozen, that some sicke men that were ashoare
before, did not know vs one from another.
         The next day we fell to land our prouisions; first our Bread,
Fish, and dry things, the men driuen to wade in the water vp
to the middles, most lamentable to behold. Within 2. dayes,
what with great flat pieces that stucke about vs, and that

which froze, it was becomne firme Ice, betwixt the Ship and
the shoare: so that then we were faine to carry all things on
our backs a mile from the Ship to the house. Within few
dayes, the hold became so frozen, that we could not get all
our things out of it, but were faine there to leaue it frozen,
till the next yeere. Then we made vs 2. other houses: our
first house was our Mansion house, wherein we did all lye
together: our other was to dresse our victuall; and the third
for a store-house: which we built a pretty distance off, for
feare of fire. And now we considered of the estate we were
in, we all doubted that the Ship was foundered: especially
our Carpenter. But suppose she were sound: yet was it a
question, whether we could get her off in the Summer, when
the tydes are low. Moreouer, she might be spoyled, lying in
the tydes way, when the Ice brake vp: and then we should
be destitute of any vessell to bring vs home. The Carpenter
vndertooke to build a Pinnace, of the burthen of 12. or 14.
tunnes, that should be ready by the Spring: that if we found
the Ship vnseruiceable, we might teare her vp, and planke
her with the Ships planke. Vpon this we resolued, and by
May brought it to that passe, that she was ready to be ioyned
together, to receyue the planke. But God mercifully prouided
otherwise for vs: We indured a bitter cold winter,
in which it pleased God to visit vs with sicknesse: so that in
the beginning of May 1632. there was but my selfe and the
Master and Surgeon perfectly sound: and he began to finde
some defect also. About the beginning of Aprill, we began
to digge the Ice out of our Ship, which by the middle of
May, we had effected.
         The 24. of May, the Ice began to breake vp betwixt the
Ship and the shoare: and about the middle of Iune, we had
off our Ship, and found her to be stanch and sound, contrary
to all our expectations. Before this time, about the middle
of May, our Carpenter dyed: and with him, the hope
of our Pinnace: Master Wardon dyed the 6. of May: our
Gunner Richard Edwards had his legge broken (which was

cut off) at the Capstang in August 1631. and languished till
the 22. of Nouember: on which day he dyed. These three
men lye buried here vnder these Tombes of stones. We lost
another man; one Iohn Barton our Quarter-Master, who
mis-carried in the little Bay that is due West from this Crosse
3. mile: the Ice breaking vnder him, so that he sunke downe,
and we neuer saw him more. The two Pictures which are
wrapt in lead, and fastened vppermost on this Crosse, are
the liuely pictures of our Soueraigne Lord and Lady, Charles,
the first; and Queene Mary his wife; King and Queene of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. The next vnder
that, is his Maiesties Royall Armes: the lowermost is the
Armes of the City of Bristoll.
         And now we are in a readinesse to depart this day, and I
intend to prosecute our discouery to the West-ward, in this
Latitude of 52. 03. and to the South-ward also, although with
little hope. Failing there, I meane to haste to Diggs Iland,
and indeauour to discouer to the North-ward. Thus hauing
had some experience of the dangers of the Ice, shoalds, and
Rockes of vnknowne places: I thought it necesary to leaue
this testimony of vs and our indeauours, if God should
take vs into his heauenly Kingdome, and frustrate our returne
into our natiue Countrey. Wherefore I desire any
noble minded Trauailer, that shall take this downe, or come
to the knowledge of it: that he will make relation of it
to our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Maiesty, and to certifie
his Grace, that we cannot as yet finde any hope of a passage
this way: and that I doe faithfully perseuer in my
seruice: accounting it but my duty, to spend my life to
giue his Maiestie contentment; whom I beseech God to
blesse with all happinesse. And that they would likewise
aduertise our worshipfull Aduenterers, of all our fortunes;
and that if as afore-said wee perish, it was not by any
want or defect in Ship or victuall, or other necessaries; all
which we haue in abundance for foure moneths and aboue:
which if occasion be, wee can prolong to sixe moneths.

Thus being at present vnable to expresse a gratefull mind otherwise
but in my prayers to God: I heartily beseech him
to powre out his bountifull blessing vpon all their honest indeauours,
and to continue their noble dispositions in Actions
of this kinde. And I faithfully promise, that if I shall come
where the like Letters and Tokens shall be left, to make a
true relation of it, as it shall be desired. So desiring the
happinesse of all mankinde, in our generall Sauiour Christ
Iesus: I end.
         
            Charleton, Iuly the second. 1632.
            
            Thomas Iames.
         
      
      
         
         THE NAMES OF THE
seuerall Instruments, I prouided
and bought for this Voyage.
         A Quadrant of old seasoned Pearetree-wood, artificially
made: and with all care possible diuided with
Diagonals, euen to minutes. It was of foure foote
(at least) Semidiameter.
         An Equilaterall Triangle of like wood; whose Radius
was fiue foote at least; and diuided out of Petiscus Table of
Tangents.
         A Quadrant of two foote Semid. of like wood: and with
like care proiected.
         The Sights, Centers, and euery other part of them lookt
to, and tryed with conuenient Compasses: to see if they
had beene wrongd or altred. And this continually, before they
were made vse of.
         
            Staues for taking Altitudes and Distances in
the heauens.
            A Staffe of seuen foote long; whose Transome was foure
foote; diuided into equall parts by way of Diagonals, that
all the figures in a Radius of tenne thousand, might be taken
out, actually.
            Another of sixe foote, neere as conuenient: and in that
manner to be vsed.
            Masters Gunters Crosse-Staffe.
            Three Iacobs Staues, proiected after a new manner: and
truly diuided out of the Table of Tangents.
            Two of Master Davis Backe-staues: with like care made
and deuided.
         
         
            Of Horizontall Instruments.
            Two Semicircles, two foote Semidiameter: of seasoned
Pearetree wood: and diuided with Diagonals, to all possible
exactnesse.
            
               
Sixe Meridian Compasses, ingeniously made; besides some
doozens of others, more common.
            Foure Needles in square boxes, of sixe inches Diameter:
and other sixe, of three inches Diameter.
            Moreouer, foure speciall Needles, (which my good friends
Master Allen and Master Marre gaue mee) of sixe inches
diameter: and toucht curiously, with the best Loade-stone in
England.
            A Loade-stone to refresh any of these, if occasion were:
whose Poles were marked, for feare of mistaking.
            A Watch-clocke, of sixe inches Diameter: and another
lesser Watch.
            A Table euery day Calculated; correspondent to the Latitude:
according to Master Gunters directions in his booke;
the better to keepe our Time and our Compasse, to iudge of
our Course.
            A Chest full of the best and choisest Mathematicall bookes,
that could be got for money in England: as likewise Master
Hackluite, and Master Purchas: and other books of Iournals
and Histories.
            Study Instruments, of all sorts.
            I caused many small Glasses to be made; whose part of
time, I knew to a most insensible thing: and so diuided and
appropriated the Logg-line, to them: making vse of Wilbrordus,
Snellius his numbers of feete answering to a Degree: and
approoued of by Master Gunter.
            I made a Meridian-line, of 120. yards long: with sixe
Plumb-lines hanging in it: some of them being aboue 30.
foot high, and the weights hung in a hole in the ground, to avoyde
winde. And this to take the Sunnes or Moones comming
to the Meridian. This line wee verified, by setting it
by the Pole it selfe, and by many other wayes.
            Two paire of curious Globes; made purposely: the workeman
being earnestly affected to this Voyage.
            
               
This was the manner that we tooke the variation of
the Compasse, and that as often as conueniently
we could, but diuers of the Tables by negligence
of my Boy are lost: but these (I hope) may suffice
to giue satisfaction of our care in Nauigation.
         
         
            
               Iuly 13th. 1631.
            
            These 13. Azimuths with the Altitu. Dec. were taken
vpon a great piece of Ice, with three Needles together: then
the Declination was not equated, the last three set foorth by
themselues, prooues the rest: viz. the Azimuth of West
with his variation: the Azimuth at due West, And the variation
by the Altitude and Azimuth at due West.
            These were taken twentie leagues to the Eastward of Salisbury
Iland; and 2. quad. one of 4. another of 2. foote
Semid. Semicircle of 2. foote Semid.
            
               
                  
                     La.
                     Deon.
                     AL.???
                     AZM
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     F.
                     Var.
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     39 42
                     77 50
                     S
                     50 11
                     S
                     27 39
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     35 33
                     90 00
                     ??
                     62 12
                     S
                     27 48
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     34 24
                     76 30
                     N
                     65 07
                     S
                     27 23
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     31 24
                     80 18
                     N
                     72 12
                     S
                     27 30
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     30 57
                     78 53
                     N
                     73 21
                     S
                     27 46
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     29 00
                     74 50
                     N
                     77 28
                     S
                     27 42
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     27 10
                     71 00
                     N
                     98 42
                     N
                     27 42
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     25 52
                     68 28
                     N
                     96 02
                     N
                     27 34
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     25 00
                     66 40
                     N
                     94 16
                     N
                     27 36
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     24 00
                     64 50
                     N
                     92 16
                     N
                     27 26
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     23 30
                     64 00
                     N
                     91 18
                     N
                     27 44
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     22 50
                     27 35
                     N
                     89 58
                     N
                     27 33
                  
                  
                     63 01
                     20 14
                     22 30
                     61 24
                     N
                     89 18
                     N
                     27 44
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane Varon is 27. 36.
                  
                  
                     The variation of the Altit: and Azim: of West. 27 33.
                  
                  
                     The variation of the Azimuth of West. 27. 48.
                  
                  
                     The variation by Azim. at due West. 27. 35.
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane of these three is 27 38.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Iuly 22. 1631.
            
            These three Azimuths and Altitudes were taken vpon a
piece of Ice the Magneticall Azimuths by the Sunnes shade
in the water, the ayre thicke of fogge, that the Sunne gaue no
perfect shade otherwayes: 10. leagues West from Mansfields
Iland.
            
               
                  
                     La.
                     Decl.
                     AL. ???.
                     AZM
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     Fr
                     Var.
                  
                  
                     60 33
                     18 25
                     34 06
                     90 00
                     S
                     64 34
                     S
                     25 26
                  
                  
                     60 33
                     18 25
                     31 34
                     84 48
                     N
                     70 08
                     S
                     25 04
                  
                  
                     60 33
                     18 25
                     18 25
                     71 35
                     N
                     82 54
                     N
                     25 21
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane is 25. 17
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               Iuly 24. 1631.
            
            These 11 Azimuths, were taken vpon a piece of Ice about
the middle of the great Bay: some of them by the shade,
and some by the sight of the Sunne in the water, the weather
being thicke of fogge.
            
               
                  
                     La.
                     Decl.
                     AL. ???.
                     AZM
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     F.
                     Var.
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     36 44
                     82 50
                     S
                     59 04
                     S
                     22 46
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     35 44
                     83 40
                     S
                     61 18
                     S
                     22 22
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     33 02
                     90 00
                     ??
                     67 14
                     S
                     22 46
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     29 49
                     84 25
                     N
                     73 40
                     S
                     21 55
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     27 25
                     79 50
                     N
                     75 10
                     S
                     22 00
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     26 27
                     78 10
                     N
                     87 14
                     S
                     22 14
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     23 48
                     72 35
                     N
                     84 38
                     S
                     22 47
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     21 16
                     68 47
                     N
                     88 38
                     S
                     22 35
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     20 40
                     67 30
                     N
                     90 00
                     ??
                     22 30
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     20 10
                     67 00
                     N
                     89 00
                     N
                     22 12
                  
                  
                     59 20
                     17 40
                     19 34
                     66 00
                     N
                     88 10
                     N
                     22 10
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane is 22d. 23. 21.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Iuly 31th. 1631.
            
            These seuerall Azimuths were taken vpon a piece
of Ice: 50. leagues off the Wester-shoare.
            
               
                  
                     AL. ???.
                     AZ. M
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     F.
                     Var.
                     ??
                  
                  
                     24 00
                     76 26
                     N
                     99 20
                     N
                     22 54
                     Latitude
                  
                  
                     23 35
                     76 00
                     N
                     98 38
                     N
                     22 38
                     58 43 43
                  
                  
                     22 50
                     75 00
                     N
                     97 18
                     N
                     22 18
                     ??
                  
                  
                     22 05
                     73 40
                     N
                     96 04
                     N
                     22 24
                     Declina.
                  
                  
                     20 32
                     71 20
                     N
                     93 32
                     N
                     22 12
                     15 43 43
                  
                  
                     18 40
                     67 55
                     N
                     90 24
                     N
                     22 29
                     ??
                  
                  
                     18 30
                     67 30
                     N
                     90 02
                     N
                     22 32
                     ??
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane is 22. 29. 34.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               August 1. 1631.
            
            These seuerall Azimuths were taken vpon a piece
of Ice: about 40. leagues off the Wester-shoare.
            
               
                  
                     AL. ???.
                     AZ. M
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     F.
                     Var.
                     ??
                  
                  
                     26 36
                     83 05
                     N
                     104. 36
                     N
                     21 31
                     Latitude
                  
                  
                     25 24
                     81 25
                     N
                     103. 06
                     N
                     21 41
                     50. 45.
                  
                  
                     24 26
                     78 38
                     N
                     100, 42
                     N
                     22 04
                     ??
                  
                  
                     22 30
                     75 16
                     N
                     97 22
                     N
                     22 06
                     ??
                  
                  
                     21 31
                     73 50
                     N
                     95 42
                     N
                     21 5
                     Declina.
                  
                  
                     20 10
                     71 27
                     N
                     93 24
                     N
                     21 57
                     15. 25.
                  
                  
                     18 42
                     68 40
                     N
                     90 58
                     N
                     22 18
                     ??
                  
                  
                     18 07
                     67 25
                     N
                     89 56
                     N
                     22 31
                     ??
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane is 22. 00.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               August. 5th. 1631.
            
            These Azimuths were taken vpon a piece of Ice,
and calculated by all the figures of the Canon
about 40. leagues off the Wester-shoare.
            
               
                  
                     ??
                     AL. ???.
                     AZ. M
                     F.
                     T. AZ
                     F.
                     Var.
                  
                  
                     ??
                     23 14
                     79 12
                     N
                     101. 02
                     N
                     21 50
                  
                  
                     Latitude
                     22 11
                     76 40
                     N
                     99 12
                     N
                     22 32
                  
                  
                     58. 37.
                     21 11
                     75 11
                     N
                     97 28
                     N
                     22 17
                  
                  
                     ??
                     20 00
                     73 02
                     N
                     95 48
                     N
                     22 46
                  
                  
                     ??
                     18 59
                     71 24
                     N
                     93 47
                     N
                     22 23
                  
                  
                     Declina.
                     17 15
                     68 35
                     N
                     90 53
                     N
                     22 18
                  
                  
                     14. 12.
                     16 42
                     67 28
                     N
                     90 00
                     ??
                     22 32
                  
                  
                     ??
                     15 39
                     65 32
                     N
                     88 18
                     N
                     22 46
                  
                  
                     ??
                     ??
                     The meane is 22. 25. 30.
                  
               
            
            These obseruations were taken the 10th. of November:
1631. the Lat. 52. 03. the difference may be conceiued, to
grow by reason of the Sunnes low Altitude and Refraction.
The others about the Summer Solstice, where difference of
Meridians is auoided, and are more exact.
            
               
                  
                     Alt. ???.
                     AZ. M.
                     T. AZ.
                     Var. West.
                  
                  
                     G. M.
                     G. M.
                     G. M.
                     G. M.
                  
                  
                     14 25
                     42 25
                     16 11
                     16 14
                  
                  
                     14 00
                     45 25
                     27 30
                     17 55
                  
                  
                     13 15
                     47 25
                     29 54
                     17 31
                  
                  
                     12 18
                     48 10
                     32 33
                     15 37
                  
                  
                     12 03
                     49 20
                     33 16
                     16 04
                  
                  
                     11 41
                     51 07
                     34 15
                     16 52
                  
                  
                     10 57
                     53 25
                     36 04
                     17 21
                  
                  
                     9 42
                     55 25
                     38 38
                     16 27
                  
                  
                     9 15
                     57 45
                     40 00
                     17 14
                  
                  
                     8 50
                     58 37
                     40 52
                     17 45
                  
                  
                     ??
                     The means is 16. 57. West.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
         
         
         An Appendix touching
Longitude.
         LAtitude and Longitude are two primary affections of the
Earth, by the helpe of these two, doth the Geographer
striue to represent the parts of the Earth that they may
keepe Symmetry and Harmony with the whole. Latitude
then is an arch of the Meridian, comprehended betweene the
Aequator and a Paralell; but Longitude is an arch of the Aequator,
intercepted by the Prime Meridian and the Meridian of a
Place, the difference of Longitudes being the difference of
two Meridians. The measure of the former is the Meridian,
the Aequator of this latter. For the exact settling of Latitudes
we haue many and absolute helpes, so that the Error if any
happen, ought to be imputed to the imperfect handling of the
Artist. But the Longitude of a Meridian is that which hath,
and still wearieth, the greatest Masters of Geography. Neuerthelesse
hath not the wise Creator left Man vnfurnished of
many excellent helpes to attaine his desire: For besides Eclipses,
especially of the Moone, (whose leasure we must often
waite, and perhaps goe without, if the Heauens be not propitious
to vs) we haue the Concurse of quicke pac'd inferiour
Planets, with superiour slow ones, or their Appulses with
some fixed Starre of knowne place, or else some other Artifice
deriued from Motions and Positions. As for the
Magneticall Needle to argue a Longitude from its Variation,
is altogether without ground. And though well furnisht Seamen
are able by their dead Reckonings (as they tearme them)
to determine the difference of Meridians somewhat neere, yet
by reason of the vnknowne quantity of a Degree in a giuen
measure (which is the Rule of the Ships way) Varieties of
aduerse winds, Different sets of Tydes, and other inuolued
incombrances, they come often wide of the mark they aime at.
The best way yet knowne to the world, is that which is deduced
from the Coelestiall Apparences, which being performed
by Iudicious Artists, may in short time rectifie our

Geographicall and Hydrogaphicall Charts hitherto in most
places fouly distorted. It is my intent here, to giue an instance
from two seuerall obseruations drawne from the Coelestiall
Bodyes, by the Author of this discourse, in his discouery for
the N. W. at the bottome of the Bay, being his wintering
place, and called by the name of Charloton??? which for Iudgement,
Circumspection and Exactnes may compare with most:
The first from the Eclips of the Moone; The second from
the Moones Mediation of Heauen, or Her comming to the
Plane of his Meridian of Charleton.
         The Captaine then mindfull of the Lunar Eclips which
was to happen October 29. Anno 1631. was wayting on
the Moone with his Instruments, but by reason of the Interposition
of the clouds, could made no Obseruation on the beginning
of her Obscuration, but at her Emersion or Totall
Recouery of Light, the heauens being more Serene, he tooke
the Altitude of the Superior Limb of the Moone 29. gr. 11. m.
The Latitude of Charlton being 52. gr. 3. min.
         At that very time, my selfe with some friends found the
exact time of the Moones Emersion at London in Gresham
Colledge (by a Quadrant of sixe foot Radius, actually cut to
each minute of the Quadrant) to be Octob. 29. 13. h. 7. m. 28
sec. or Octob. 30. d. at one of the clocke, seuen minutes, and
about a halfe in the morning.
         Now because the Tables of the Coelestiall Motions, lately
published by that most Learned and Industrious Lansberg, doe
much amuse, the world with that loftie title of Perpetuity, it
shall not be amisse to enquire after the time of the Captaines
Obseruation from them, that so by comparing the one with
the other we may obtaine the difference of Meridians, which
is the matter now sought after.
         The middle motions of the Luminaries answerable to the equall
time of the Emersion of the Moone, are these which
follow.
         
            
            
               
                  ??
                  ??
                  Sex.
                  Gr.
                  M.
                  S.
               
               
                  The middle motion of the
                  Sunne
                  3.
                  47.
                  39.
                  26.
               
               
                  Center of the ???
                  3
                  15 49
                  58
               
               
                  Apogaeu?? of the ???
                  1
                  35
                  45
                  44
               
               
                  The middle motion of the
                  Lo??gitude of the)
                  2
                  59
                  29
                  1
               
               
                  Anomaly of the)
                  0
                  5
                  11
                  30
               
               
                  Latitude of the)
                  4
                  32
                  8
                  15
               
               
                  The Prosthaphaeresis of the Aequinox???
                  0
                  0
                  12
                  30
               
            
         
         Being thus furnished with these middle motions wee are
next to enquire for the true places of the Luminaries & their
Concomitants, as their right Ascentions, the Declination, Latitude,
Semidiameter, Parallax, & Refraction of the ???, that so
the true Altitude of the ??? center, and consequently the time
of the Emersion may be had at Charleton.
         
            For the Sunnes true place.
            
               
                  
                     ??
                     Sex.
                     Gr.
                     M.
                     S.
                  
                  
                     The middle motion of the ??? Center.???
                     3.
                     15.
                     49.
                     58
                  
                  
                     The Prosthaphaeresis of the Center add.???
                     0.
                     1
                     37.
                     0
                  
                  
                     The Proportionall Scruples.???
                     1.
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     The middle motion of the ??? Apogaeum.???
                     1.
                     35.
                     45.
                     44
                  
                  
                     The true motion of the Apogaeum subtr.???
                     1.
                     37.
                     22.
                     44
                  
                  
                     The middle motion of the ??? is???
                     3.
                     47.
                     39.
                     26
                  
                  
                     The Anomaly of the ??? orbe???
                     2.
                     10.
                     16.
                     42
                  
                  
                     The Prosthaphaeresis of the ??? orbe???
                     0.
                     1.
                     32.
                     43
                  
                  
                     The excesse to be added???
                     0.
                     0.
                     0.
                     20
                  
                  
                     The absolute Prosthaph. of the ??? orbe subtr.
                     0.
                     1.
                     33.
                     3
                  
                  
                     The midd. mot. of the ??? fro?? the true Aequi.
                     3.
                     47.
                     51.
                     56
                  
                  
                     The true mot. of the ??? from the true Aequi.
                     3.
                     46.
                     18.
                     53
                  
                  
                     Therefore the ??? true place was in ??????
                     0.
                     16.
                     8.
                     53
                  
                  
                     And his right Ascention???
                     ??
                     223.
                     49.
                     53
                  
               
            
         
         
            For the Moones true place.
            
               
                  
                     The Anomaly of the ??? Center???
                     5.
                     59.
                     18.
                     2
                  
                  
                     The Prosthaphaeresis of the ??? Center???
                     0.
                     0.
                     5.
                     36
                  
                  
                     The proportionall Scruples???
                     0.
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     The Anomaly of the ??? orbe???
                     0.
                     5.
                     11.
                     30
                  
                  
                     The Aequated Anomaly of the ??? orbe???
                     0.
                     5.
                     5.
                     54
                  
                  
                     
                        The Prosthaphaeresis of the ??? orbe subtr.???
                     0.
                     0.
                     24.
                     4.
                  
                  
                     The mid. mot. of the ??? Longitude from the ???.
                     2.
                     59.
                     39.
                     1
                  
                  
                     The true motion of the ??? Longit. from the ???.
                     2.
                     59.
                     14.
                     57
                  
                  
                     The mid. mot. of the ??? from the true aequin.
                     3.
                     47.
                     51.
                     56
                  
                  
                     The true mot. of the ??? from the true aequin.
                     0.
                     47.
                     6.
                     53
                  
                  
                     Therefore the ??? true place was in ??????
                     0.
                     17.
                     6.
                     53
                  
                  
                     For the ??? Latitude
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     The middle motion of the ??? Latitude.
                     4.
                     32.
                     8.
                     15.
                  
                  
                     The ??? absolute Prosthaph. of her Orb subtr.
                     0.
                     0.
                     24.
                     4.
                  
                  
                     The ??? true motion of Latitude.
                     4.
                     31.
                     44.
                     11.
                  
                  
                     The ??? Northerne Latitude was.
                     0.
                     0.
                     9
                     5.
                  
                  
                     And her Reductiue Scruples Subtr.
                     0.
                     0.
                     0.
                     26.
                  
                  
                     But the ??? true motion in her proper Orbe was
                     0.
                     17.
                     6:
                     53:
                  
                  
                     Therefore the ??? true place reduced to the Eclipt
                     ???.
                     17.
                     6.
                     27.
                  
                  
                     And because the North Lat. of the ??? was
                     ??
                     0:
                     9:
                     5:
                  
                  
                     Therefore will her Right ascens be.
                     ??
                     44:
                     35:
                     10
                  
                  
                     And her Declination???
                     ??
                     17:
                     7:
                     49
                  
                  
                     And because we haue the distance of the Moone.
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     From the earth in Semidiameters of the earth
                     64
                     15
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     Therefore shall the ??? apparent Semidiam: be???
                     ??
                     0.
                     15.
                     ??
                  
                  
                     And her parallax of Altitude.
                     ??
                     0.
                     47.
                     0.
                  
                  
                     Now because the Altitude of the limbe of the ??? was found
by obseruation to bee???
                     ??
                     ??
                     29:
                     11:
                  
                  
                     If we shall substract her Semidiameter???
                     ??
                     ??
                     0:
                     15:
                  
                  
                     And the refraction???
                     ??
                     ??
                     0:
                     2:
                  
                  
                     We haue the apparent Altitude of the ??? center???
                     ??
                     ??
                     28:
                     54:
                  
                  
                     To this if we adde the parallax of Altitude???
                     ??
                     ??
                     0:
                     47:
                  
                  
                     We shall haue the true Altitude of the ??? Center:
                     ??
                     ??
                     29:
                     41:
                  
               
            
            Hauing thus the Latitude of the place, the ??? true Altitude
with her declination, by the resolution of a Sphaericall Triangle
according to the 11 Probleme, lib. 2. Part. 2. of our
British Trigonometry we haue the distance of the ??? from
the Meridian???63: 26:
            And by comparing this Arch with the difference of the
ascentions of the Luminaries, the Time of the ??? totall recouery
of her light at Charlton will be 7. hou. 49. min. 28. sec.

Which subtr. from the time of the Emersion at London. 13
hou. 7. min. 28. sec.
            The difference of Meridians in respect of time will be 5: h.
18: m. o. So that Charlton is remooued from London Westwards,
79. gr. 30. m.
            This may likewise be confirmed by a second different obseruation
made at the instant of the Moones Culmination or
Mediation of Heauen, at which time the Altitude of the
brightest Starre in the Asterisme of the Northerne Crowne,
(being of the second Magnitude) was found to be 33. gr.
27. m. Easterly. Ann. 1632. Iune 23.
            It may be Problematically deliuered after this manner.
Hauing the Latitude of a Place, with the Altitude
of a knowne fixed Starre at the moment of the
??? culmination, to finde the Longitude.
            This fixed Starre is of knowne longitude and latitude, therfore
was his Declination 27: 59: and right ascension 229. 46.
Now by the resolution of a Sphaericall Triangle of 3. knowne
sides we haue the distance of this Star from the Meridian, and
by consequence the right ascension of the ???, whence we conclude
her Culmination to be with the 28: 10: m. of ???. but the
Moones true place was much lesse. Here note that the scrupulosity
of time is vnknowne, and therefore we cannot argue
the ??? true place from thence (though I grant it might be euinced)
for that were to begge the Question, and to know
that first, which we looke after.
            In the next place we are to inquire with what point of the
Ecliptique the ??? did culminate with vs here at London, that
so from the difference of her places, of the like affection, we
may deduce the difference of Meridians.
            Obseruation on the ??? Culmination here at London wee
made none, therefore must we haue recourse to the aforesaid
Tables of Lansberg, and from thence calculate the same. Now
because the ??? was not farre remooued from the ??? opposite
point. It will not be amisse to enquire first the ??? place at
midnight.
            
               
                  
                     ??
                     Sex.
                     Gr.
                     M.
                     S.
                  
                  
                     The ??? opposite place at midnight in ???
                     0
                     11.
                     18.
                     15.
                  
                  
                     The ??? true place at midnight reduced to the
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                     ??
                  
                  
                     Ecliptique was in ??????
                     0.
                     23.
                     33.
                     18.
                  
                  
                     
                        The South Latitude of the Moone was ???
                     0.
                     4.
                     56.
                     38
                  
                  
                     Therefore the difference of Ascensions will be ???
                     ??
                     14.
                     6.
                     0
                  
                  
                     The Diurnall motion of the Moone ???
                     ??
                     14.
                     24
                     0
                  
                  
                     Therefore the Moones proper motion answerable to
the difference of Ascensions is ???
                     ??
                     0.
                     33.
                     50
                  
                  
                     Which added to the Moones true place at midnight
                     ??
                     23.
                     33.
                     18
                  
                  
                     Giues vs the Moones true place reduced to
the Ecliptique at her Culmination at London ???
                     ??
                     24.
                     7.
                     8
                  
               
            
            Now because the ??? Southern Latitude was 4. 56. 38, the
Arch therefore of the Ecliptique comprehended betweene
the Moones true place and the culminating point of the Eclipt.
will Trigonometrically be found to be 54: m. 38. s. which added
to the ??? true place before found giues vs the culminating
point of the Eclipti. 25. gr. 1. m. 46. s. which is lesse then that
found at Charleton: the difference being 3. 8. 24. therfore is the
place of Obseruation Westerly of London. Hauing therefore the
??? Diurnall motion and the difference of the culminating
points we conclude the Meridian of Charlton to be distant
fro?? this of Lo??don 5. h. 14. m. of time or 78. 30. of the Equator.
            The difference betweene that of the Eclipse, and this latter
obseruation is only 4. minutes of time or one degree, a difference
easily pardoned, especially if wee shall compare the
same with some other places, yea euen such as border neerely
on each other. To giue an instance on 2 eminent places which
lye in the heart of Europe, Rome & Norenberg: Their difference
of Longitude Regiomontanus makes 36. Werner 32.
Appian 34. Maestlin and Origan 33. Stofler 18. Maginus 26.
Schoner 12. Mercator and Hondius as much. Stadius 13. Iansonius
10. Longomontaus 16. Lausberg: 10. Kepler by 2.
obseruations on 2 Lunar Eclipses, but 4 minutes of time.
            This varietie among these great Artists, will I hope pardon
vs this difference of 4. m. and be a means to incourage our
English Sea-men and others, to make such or the like obseruations
in forraine parts as the heauens shall be offred vnto them.
            
               H. GELLIBRAND.
            
         
      
      
         
         To the venerable Artists and younger
Students in Diuinity, in the famous Vniuersity
of CAMBRIDGE.
         YOV nobly-witted, and ingenuously-studied
Academians:
whose excellency in all kinds of
learning, all forraigne Vniuersities
doe admire, and none atteine
vnto. I here present you a Voyage
to Cholcos, though not the
Golden-fleece with it: the Searche,
I meane, but not the finding; of that so much talkt
of, so often sought for, North-West Passage, and
neerer way into the South-Sea. That, wherein so
much Time and Treasure haue beene expended, so
many braue Spirits employed, and yet none discouered.
Perchance, there is no such Passage to be found:
and that the Spaniards, by the gullery of their false
Sea-Cards, and the fable of an old Greeke Pilote;
haue but diuerted our English and Dutch Sea-men,
from their golden Indyes. This plot of theirs hath
taken, for these many yeeres: and it appeares to bee
but a plot, for that themselues neuer make vse of
this Passage. For mine owne part, I suppose that
the Philosophers stone is in the North-West Passage. My
argument for it is, For that theres so much Philosophy
in the way to it.
         
            
So much, and such variety: such variety, and that
so various, (I thinke) from what is receiued in the
Schooles: that it were well worth the disquisition of
an Vniuersity, (and I wish you the first honour of it)
either to find out, how these Obseruations may bee
reduced to Aristotles Philosophy: or whether they need
any other enquiry, and ought to be examined by
some other Rules, then Aristotle hath yet light vpon.
This is my purpose of inscribing it vnto you. Of
this one thing am I confident: that you are all so
rationall, and ingenuous, as to preferre Truth, before
Authority: Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, but magis
amica veritas. Your Sciences, then, being Liberall;
your Studies, I know, haue so farre passed into your
maners, that your minds are so too, and that such
as haue already profited beyond the credulity required
in a yong learner, and are themselues promoted
to be Masters of the Arts; though they still reuerence
their old Greeke Tutor, yet they will not suffer
that of Pythagoras Schoole, so to domineere in Aristotles,
as to let an Ipse dixit, goe away with it: much
lesse allow it the authority of a Mayors hammer, with
one knocke to silence all arguments.
         Vpon this confidence, I, with all due respects,
here preferre two Propositions vnto your discussing.
The first this, Whether those Rules of Aristotles Philosophy
be to be allowed so Vniuersall, that they hold all
the world ouer. The second this, Whether they ought
to be so magisteriall, as to prescribe against all other examinations.
The first of these, I shall but problematically
propound vnto you: but in the second, I hope
a man of my cloathing, may bee allowed the freedome
of being something more earnest.
         
            
But that I may not come with preiudice to the
making of these motions, or bee thought, vpon
some ignorance or ambition, to speake against the incomparable
Aristotle; I shall desire all my fellow Academians
to allow me so much discretion, as to know,
That he that shall in your hearings, oppose your Aristotle;
does like the Ship here spoken of, runne
against a Rocke, endanger his owne bulge, and the
stauing of his vessell. No, I so farre honour the old
Aristotle, that I well allow him to bee Master and
Moderator of the Schooles: and that there is the same
respect due to him in the Schooles, which, by Reason
and long Custome, is due to one of the Kings Ships in
the Narrow Seas; That in acknowledgement of a Soueraignty,
euery other name ought to strike sayle to him.
Aristotle (it must be confest) hath made all learning
beholding to him: no man hath learned to confute
him, but by him; and vnlesse hee hath plowed with
his heyfer. He had the most incomparable wit, and
was the most Logicall and demonstratiue deliuerer
of himselfe, of all the Sonnes of nature: One, who
best of all deserued to be cald Her Principall Secretary:
one, who not onely adornes a Library, but
makes it: Qui habet Aristotelem, habet Bibliothecam,
is truer of him, then of the Great Comparer. This
is my opinion of him; and I wish him more studyed.
         Tis not,1. therefore, the name, or the authority of
the great Aristotle, that my Propositions meddle
withall: but whether his obseruations gathered out
of this part of the world alone, could, like a
royall Passe or a Commission, carry a man all the world
ouer?
         
            
It must be confest, That in respect of the Equinoctiall
and the Latitude that Aristotle liued in, hee
was but a Northern man: and twas his owne Rule,
that Nihil agit extra Sphaeram actiuitatis suae. So then,
it would bee put to voyces to consider, whether he
that knew but these Northerne parts, and the Mediterranean
Sea; could possibly make such collections,
by what was here to be learned, as should bee
vnfaileable in the Southern Haemisphere and the two
Indyes? Plainely, those that are conuersant in the
nauigations and bookes of voyages into those parts;
haue found so many contrarieties to obserue; that
it were rather tedious, then difficult, to fill vp a Notebooke
with them.
         The Ancients, wee know (as if they had measured
the world by the Yeard-wand) restrained the limits
of temperature, and habitation, by the fiue Zones:
without consideration of any interloping or concurring
causes, which experience hath now found out,
to haue quite altered their obseruation. I adde, that
a good leisure and diligence might obserue, how in
the contrary part of the world, there be found cleane
contrary Causes and Effects, vnto those in this part
of the world. The South-wind there, brings cold and
Winter: and the North, is the rainy wind. How will
the Thunder and the Wind, be made agree with Aristotles
definition of a Meteore? In some places of the
Mountaines Andes by Peru, it thunders euer. The
East-Indyes haue their Monsons and their steady
winds, constant for sixe moneths together: and who
shall assigne their causes? Then the doctrine of
the Tydes, nothing so vncertaine: which ebbe and
flow in some places, different; and in others contrary,

to the Moone and her motions. This (as I remember)
is Aristotles definition of a Meteore,Aristoteles, 1. Meteor 1. That it is, An
imperfect mixt body, generated out of an infirme and inconstant
concretion of the Elements; which therefore cannot
be durable. Now the Monson, is both constant
in his continuance this yeere, and in his returne next
yeere; most constantly keeping his seasons halfe yeere
one way, and halfe yeere another way, for all ages:
nothing more constantly or durably; and therefore
nothing like Aristotles Meteore. And so for the Thunder
vpon the Andes: it is first perpetuall; secondly,
not caused by a dry exhalation, (as Aristotle wills) but
hanging ouer such hils as are couered with snow and
a perpetuall winter. Witnesse the Thunder on the
Alpes also: yea and that in the middle of the Sea,
500. leagues from shoare, or any thing that is dry.
yea, it frequently both Snowes and Thunders vpon the
Andes, at one instant: and in dry places that are hard
by, scarce euer Thundering.
         But not to passe the Line for it; You see in this
little Booke, how Charlton Iland, which is no more
Northerly then your Cambridge; is yet so vnsufferably
cold, that it is not habitable: and that there encounter
so many different, (at least so seeming) occurrences
of nature, as were well worth the disquisition
of a Philosopher. I could, (in my smal reading) instance
in many many other particulars: which I had rather
should be found out by some industrious searchers
after Nature, in the Moderne Relations of our Discoverers,
then in this my short Proposition. Tis not to
be doubted, but that the carefull reading of our
Books of Voyages, would more elucidate the History
of Nature, and more conduce to the improuement of

Philosophy, then any thing that hath beene lately
thought upon. These Navigations haue in part fulfilled
that of the Prophet,Dan. 12. 4. Many shall passe to and
fro, and knowledge shall be encreased. This, I suppose,
might be obserued from this study, That the great
and infinite Creator hath so disposed and varied euery
thing, that it is impossible for mans reason and obseruation
to conclude him: and therefore, though vulgar
and receiued Philosophie, may giue a man a generall
hint, all the world ouer; yet no Vniuersall and vnfayling
certainty.
         This brings mee to my Second Proposition,2. That
seeing God will not haue his works, (no more then
his Kingdome) to come by obseruation;Luke 17. 20. Whether,
then, ought any humane dictates to be so Magisteriall, as to
prescribe against all other examination?
         No humane study more conduces to the setting
forth of Gods glory, then the contemplation of his
great workes, in Philosophie: for though a smattering
knowledge in Second Causes, warps the mind towards
Atheisme; yet a higher speculation of them, brings
about againe to Religion. No man, I beleeue,
will thinke it fit for vs to haue a Pope in Philosophie;
one, that no body shall presume to censure of: but all
be bound to aduance his Decretalls, aboue the Holy
Scriptures. This is the scandall that my selfe, and diuers
good men take, at the vndue authority in some
heates pinn'd vpon the Stagerite.
         I am sorry that the Israelites dotage vpon Salomons
Philosophie,Suidas, & Rabbini. should haue caused the zealous Hezekiah
to call in and to suppresse those vnualuable Physicks:
for feare, I suppose, lest their credit should haue as
much derogated fro?? the authority of the Holy Scriptures;

as the brazen Serpent (which he destroyed about
the same time) had done from Religion. None will beleeue,
that Salomons Philosophie was contrary to the
Scriptures; seeing the Scripture commends Salomon
for them. Twas not Hezekiahs feare, therefore, (or
not onely) lest there might haue beene a competition
betweene them, but a neglect of one of them: he was
iealous lest the Scripture might haue any writing set
vp by it, though not against it.
         Can Diuines, then, be blamed for speaking, when
they heare Aristotles Philosophy to be solely magnified,
and the study of the Scripture Philosophy, disrespected?
Or that when tis confest, That such a thing
is true in Diuinity, and yet the Moderating of the point
determine for Philosophie? Nay, to heare it cald absurd
and ridiculous, to haue Scripture vrg'd at all, in
point of Philosophy? No doubt there is, But whatsoeuer
is false in Diuinity, is also false in Nature, how
much show of truth soeuer it passes with, in Philosophy.
Philosophy hath taken its turne in the Schooles: and
the holy Texts by the Schoolemen, haue euen been submitted
vnto Aristotles: yea, to the great corruption
of Theologie, as the complaint is, hath this man been
so farre aduanced, That Contra est Philosophus, & Contra
est Apostolus; haue familiarly passed vp and down,
for equall Oppositions: so that it hath been a measuring
cast oftentimes, betwixt the Prophet and the Peripatetick:
and by foule play hath the measure beene made
to stand the harder at the Peripatetick, for that the
Prophet hath beene enforced to comply with him by
a wrested interpretation. Thus had S. Paul need giue his
caveat vnto Theologie, as well as vnto Theologues, Beware
lest any man spoyle you through Philosophy.
         
            
All this were to no purpose, vnlesse the Text of
God were excellent in this kinde; and embellished,
here and there, with most admirable Philosophy.
What incomparably rare foot-steps of it, haue we in
the Bookes of Genesis, Iob, and the Psalmes? How
noble a Study then were it, and how worthy the leisure
of some excellently learned; to bestow some
time vpon it? Valesius the Physician, hath in his Sacra
Philosophia done something in this kinde: who yet
might haue done better, here and there, for the honour
of the Scriptures. I am not so sottish to beleeue,
That euery particular is to be drawn out of Scripture:
tis none of my doteage, that. Or that God in Scripture
did intend, euery where, the accuratenesse of
Philosophy; or stand to be so curious in definitions and
decisions. Nor so foolish would I be thought, as to
haue all Philosophy taken in pieces, and new moulded
by the Scriptures. Nor, that nothing should be determined
on, till a Text confirmed it. But this, perchance,
might profitably be thought vpon: That
where the Scriptures haue any thing in this kinde, it
should more reuerently be esteemed; Collections
out of scattered places, (as is done out of Aristotle)
made: these compared, and their Resultances obserued.
This, surely, would amount to more, then is
yet thought of: and, a-Gods name, let Schollers be so
bold with Aristotle, as to examine him vpon good
assurance, by what is Truths Touch-stone: Receiued
Philosophy is a most necessary hand-maid to the Scriptures;
but let her not be set aboue her Lady, nor no
competition be maintained betwixt them.
         Something else remaines to be thought of: That
seeing the same God, who gaue Aristotle these good

parts; hath, in like manner, raised vp many excellent
Spirits moe: whether it were not iniurious vnto
what is done, and a discouragement to what might be
done; to haue the inuentions or obseruations of those
excellent wits and great industries, so abasht with
Aristotles authoritie; that they can haue no credit in
the world, for that his Dictates haue pre-occupated
all good opinion? Let it not then be thought vnequall,
to examine the first cogitations of the old Philosophy,
by the second thoughts of our more moderne
Artists: for that the same improuement may by this
meanes accrew vnto our Physicks, that hath aduanced
our Geography, our Mathematicks, and our Mechanicks.
And let it not be thought so insolent, to refuse Aristotles
authoritie singly, where his reason is not so
concluding; seeing other men haue taken the boldnesse
to doe that before vs, in seuerall kinds. Some
haue perfected, and others controld his Ethicks, by
the Scriptures: as Scultetus, Wallaeus and some others.
Iustin Martyr sir-named the Philosopher, hath purposely
written Contra dogmata Aristotelis: Basson and Gassendus,
(two braue men) haue newly written pointblanck
against him: nor haue they taken away all liberty,
from those that are to follow them.
         And thus, with renewing my former protestation
for mine owne respects to Aristotle, I conclude my
two Propositions: which I desire may receiue a fauourable
construction from all ingenuous, imcapricious
Schollers. I meant them, out of good will to promote
learning; to encourage and countenance future
vndertakings: and in such a case, a little too much
saying, may be thought not to haue exceeded an honest
Rhetorication: for I would not be thought too

earnest in it. The hint for all this, I tooke from this
booke: which in mine owne and some better Iudgements;
is (to say no more) as well done, and enriched
with as sure and vsefull obseruations, as any in this
kinde. I was desired by the able Author, and some
other friends; to ouer-looke the written Copy of it,
and to amend the English here and there; in which I
did not despaire of doing something: for that, in my
yonger time, I had a little acquainted my selfe with
the language of the Sea. That which put me in the
head to inscribe it vnto your Names (most excellently
learned Academians) was, for that the place of
this Wintering, was within a minute or two, of the
heighth of our Cambridge. Which my prayer to God
is, that your Studies may make famous.
         
            Yours William Watts.
         
      
   
