<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
            
            

         
      
      
         
            
A TREATISE OF DIRECTION, HOW To travell safely, and profitably into Forraigne Countries.
         Written by Thomas Neale of Warncford, in the County of Southampton, Esquire.
         
            Oh youth! a greater order doth arise
            Of daily Chances: let it not suffice
            To see th' adjoyning France: but bravely know
            The farthest ster, and the winds that blow
            From Northerne Boreas: see faire Egypts strand,
            And that hot Easterne Nabathean land
            That views the rising Sun: and that which calls
            It selfe from thise red beames, where Phoebus fals.
            That at the last thou happily mai'st come
            Wiser then great Ulisses to thy home.
            Petronius.
         
         LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson. 1643.
      
      
         
         
         To his dearely beloved Brother, Mr. VVilliam Neale at Tours in France, or elsewhere these.
         IF all men in a manner (most dear Brother) applying themselves unto any action of consequence, may seeme to need, a Counsellor and director: much

more certainly may hee want this ayde, which wandereth through uncertaine passages, and walketh through the unknown wayes of an unstable conversation. And since (as it seemeth to mee) that man hath good, and propitious lucke, which in his doubtfull extremities may have the opportunity to flye unto wholsome and grave counsels: there can nothing be more happily assigned unto an ingenuous, and well educated nature, then some path or learned direction, which may be rather signed with the lively pourtraicture of eloquence, then with lime or chalke-stone. This noble facultie,

I must confesse, I cannot boast, because it is both unseemly for a teacher of naked truth, to use the adulterate flourishes. of Rhetorique, and also, because it is so meanly apparant in mee, that it will presently decay, if it should bee brought before, the judicious lights of these times: only my chiefe ayme is in this Treatise, to shew and breath forth the ingenuous candour of my minde; and my brotherly affection towards you; if those rules, which in the following subject bee proposed, may by

you bee received with the like kind inclination. There are some (I perswade my selfe) of a light and brain-sick condition, which (being also not few in number) desire to borrow no directions from the store-house of learned Philosophie: and so much contemne the rules of contemplation, and the demonstrations which are deduced from our solitary thoughts, that they suppose these Canons, but meere ridiculous, and crasie fansies, and the vaine blasts of swelling Ayre. But how much you contemne

the sottish opinion of these men, and dislike of this most pernitious tenet against all vertuous proceedings I am very well acquainted: having in your childish yeares, heard your labotious Essayes, most elegantly for that age employed, in the praises and commendations of contemplative men; for there is no man without all question, which desireth (with Ennius) to live the life of a reasonable creature, but doth cordially admire learning, and desireth to salute those

sweet flowers of Science, from whose fragrant beds, sundry ohoyce compositions of elocution doth arise, whereby ordinary things, may bee understood with delight, and obscure things may bee made easie by industrie. So generall and learned a mistresse is Theory, joyned with the discreet practise of things, that from this store-house for all uses, will not be wanting matter and workmanship, to supply the richnesse of our wits, for intention, judgement, or the finall ends of our enterprises.

Those things therefore (dearely steemed brother) which I deduce from this Magazine, and in the subsequent Tract, doe propose unto you; I entreat you not to undervalew, untill the second consideration, the third reading over, and the fourefold more acurate knowledge (then yet your yeares are capable of) of humane subtleties and affaires, may convict men in these present directions, an importunate affecter of trifling observations, or a bringer forth of such productions, which

are obscure, and erroneous from that round Cylindr of vertues peregrination. Neither can I conceive, that you spend your pretious time amisse, when you cast your eyes, and your most serious faculties upon learned discourses, as though that these were but employments for idle times, and hinderances to affaires of consequence; thinking it a childish practise, (as many doe,) to meditate, or write out any learned Contemplation. Beleeve me, those follies which they that affect this lazinesse, commit, are

meere frivolous ravings, and oftentimes, not valuable in the right scale of reason, to turne downe the weight of a crackt nut-shell. Avoid them; for rightly doth Homer instruct you, in his first booke of the learned Travailour; under the person of Telemachus;
         
            It fits thee not (now age more wisdome brings)
            Still, for to follow those same childish things.
         
         
            Dated at Warneford Aprill 3. 1638.
            
         
         Farewell.
      
      
         
         
         To the Reader.
         MAny there are (Courteous Reader,) which have and doe daily observe, to their due commendation, in the voyages they undertake, things worthy the eternall register of fame: and some have not beene wanting in all ages which in the words of that learned man (Gaspar Waserus) non tantum transcurrendo, corpora hominum aspiciunt, sed etiam animos, atquererum

momenta, non margines, aut super fines introspiciunt: But few or none, which have prescribed the exact and profitable limits, which ought to direct this laudable purpose. And therefore I have observed it to be a custome (perhaps, where it is well sorted, not unprofitable) among those which send forth their sons, pupils, or kinsemen to travell, to elect some discreet, and well experienc't Companion, which may more safely waft them to their owne homes backe againe, through many tempests, that continually use to assault those which Iourny from their homes. But these doe not alwayes fulfill the intentions of the Directors, or rather imployers; because frequently

most men belye or overweene their own sufficiencie: and (which is worse) usually overshadow, by their cunning demeanour, at or before their election, their owne?? vices.
         I have therefore thought it, in my opinion, alwaies a profitable worke; if any (which bath ability for directions of this quality) studious, and sober man, would, collect, to necessary and pertinent heades, such monitions cautions, and observations, which might be easily found out: whereby the hot spirits of some novices may be wholesomely restrained and faithfully instructed. For these dumbe counsellors, are commonly most trusty, and carry with them in their prudent directions, collected from both reading

and experience more solid profit: then those which eyther readily spend their Iudgements without meditation, or at leastwise have no other but transitory and superficiall knowledge. Finding therefore none that hath in our vulgar language (to my remembrance) undertaken this profitable essay; I have adventured to make publique a small treatise of direction how to travell profitably, and safely into forraigne Countries; which in another idiome I had some 4 yeares since addressed, to a neere and deere travellor of my acquaintance. The originall shall hereafter appeare, (although not so fully furnished) if this impolished translation, with the not altogether unnecessary additions may passe

without the censure of the criticall, and with the allowance of the Courteous reader. I well know the presses groane with the weight of pamphlets and (since this most happy invention) innumerable bookes of all sortes lye moulding in most private studies, and libraries, fearing the wormes, and desiring their readers. Nay many iudicious volumes of former, and moderne times doe now cum blattis et tincis rixari; whilst many more idle vanities or raging follyes doe busymens minds upon worse imploiments. Sed (in the phrase of Baudius) quae est ista profusio temporis in hac vitae brevitate, tantaque copia rerum scitu dignissimarum, tempus tanquam rem vacuam

aut noxiam super vacuis impendere? nec supervacuis tantum sed noxiis, vtquae dulcedine quadam sui, praeclarissima quaeque ingenia alliciant ad se, & avocent a melioribus? expertus loquor, nec quisquam tibi mihi ve verba dederit, ut in plurimorum nugis, magnum aliquod aut secretum bonum inesse suspicemur. I have therefore provided a remedy in this little treatise to mitigate this disease, for my selfe and others (if they will as many doe,) have any confidence of an unknown physitian. Heere also the patient may trust without danger; and knowing once the quality of the potion, take as little as it pleaseth him selfe. For the needlesse

(which some perhaps, male volent esteemers of other mens endeavours, may object) subject of this booke; I will answer with a learned Philologer: Stultum est, certe serum nimis jam demum incipere misereri chartarum, quae tam di??, tam miser??, sine omni gratia perierunt, & pereunt quotidie. Besides, Scribimus indocti doctique And there is not (if we beleeve Pliny) any booke out of which the laborious, and candid reader, may not collect some profit. How ever I have made it publique for to serve my owne turne; who have now one, I may not repent to leave this unto, as a legacy, or direction. But I would be willing to benefit more, and amongst

the rest my courteous, and benevolent reader otherwise.
         Optarem ut placeam, sin minus ut taceam
         From my house. At Warneford.
         
            T. N.
            3. Feb. 1642.
         
      
   
   
      
         
         A Treatise of direction; how to travaile profitably, and safely into forraigne Countries.
         NOw therefore, that we may methodically signe those precepts, which in the epistle we have generally premised, it will not be impertinent to bring before the reader, their logicall distribution: and first that we may profitably bend our directions, let us behold the end, unto which, your resolution and my speech ought to be referred. The end therefore of discreet Travaile, is Wisedome: which undertaken

with a fortunate preparation, is circumscribed with two bounds, to wit, men travaile for experience sake, and the hardning of the bodies faculties; or, for to better the gifts of the mind. The first cause of experience, and bettering the inward parts, carried Plato into AEgypt, Pythagoras into those regions of Italy, which were then called, the greater Graecia, and ushered Apollonius (that I may use the words of Hierom) unto the scorched desarts of India, and the secret conclave of the Sunne. The latter moved those great warriors (if wee allow not the desire, of renowne to bee the only cause) Alexander and Iulius

to take farre Iourneyes, that they might not only in words, but in verity prove themselves as well hardy, as valiant.
         Therefore that great Macedonian monarch, when hee observed a Common Souldier frozen almost to death by passing through those mountainous Counties; descending from his throne, or chaire of state, placed the halfe dead souldier therein, that after those delicacies of ambition, which hee bought by the endeavours of the common souldier, hee might obtaine the fame of a compassionate and hardy man. So often Iulius Caesar, that true, and legitimate

son of Mars, as wel in his descent, as actions, was wont to take, not only the same diet, and lodging with the meanest of his souldiers: but some times upon especiall occasion, he was used to prevent the marches, and with incredible celerity to passe one hundred miles within the compasse of one day. Rightly did these famous chiefaines understand that true, and ancient sentence of the poet Timocles in Atbenaeus: 1. 6.
         
            Each noble soule most labours takes, for why?
            His honours issue from his Industrie.
         
         Heated with this Imagination, did Alexander after the laborious siege of the City Oxidrace, leapt in a most ardent sweat, into the river

Cephysus: that by enduring at the same time the heat of the south, and the cold of the north, he might shew the strong composition of his body, and the Invincible tolerance of his mind. But much more was the wonderfull tolerance of the Phylosophers, as though there had among them beene this only strife, which should be able to endure most. For Zeno the master or beginner of the stoick sect, when he might have lived safe in his owne Countrey, travelled out of desire of encreasing his knowledge, and shewing his constancy, into Sicilie, to the City of Phalaris that most inhumane Tyrant, named Agrigentum, being so confident of his

Towne abilities in enduring, saith Valerius l. 3. that by his precepts, the barbarous ferity of the people, and cruell savage in humanity of the Tyrant himselfe might be mollified. A Philosopher also of the same name being entertained by Nearchus likewise a most fierce Tyrant, and after some conspiracy against him being taken and also freed from the tortures of the rack upon hope of some farther Confession, approching neere unto that monster of men, he so strongely fastned with his teeth upon the eare of the Tyrant, that he bit his eare from his head; neither left his hold until his bowels were plucked forth. Strange are the examples of Anaxarchus, Theodorus, Caelanus the Indian,

& of other Gymnosophists, which we read of their tollerance in this, and other authors: al which to adde unto this Topique will be both tedious, and unnecessary. And certainely this is most plainely Confessed, by al that read the examples of histories, that men which have beene Inclined to travaile have nothing so much desired, as glory, and credit, amongst those forraigne nations where they have beene entertained, which some have endeavoured to obtaine by the vigour of the minde, and the faculties of an understanding, shining with the sparkes of vertues and learning: others have laboured to get by the vastnesse, strength, patience, and

agility of their bodies. But this ostentation of bodily strength is more sordid, then the other, which is most ingeniously decyphered by the witty Poet Martiall.
         
            Hoc ego tuque sumus: sed quod sum non potes esse.
            Tu, quod es ?? populo, quilibet esse potest.
            We both have humane shape: but what I am
            Doe what thou wilt, thou canst scarce ever bee.
            But such a one as thou, each Cobler can
            Or any worme of the Vulgarity.
         
         Homer also, a most exquisite morall Philosopher and Poet, being about to designe the perfect lineaments of a discreet Travellour, doth not assigne him the strength of Ajax, or the cholerique fury of

Diomed, but under the person of Vlisses frameth him, a subtle observer of mens manners and rites politique; for this was hee,
         
            Which often and with good discretion saw
            Each Cities manners, and each nations Law.
            And many troubles harbour'd in his minde
            How he againe his native home might find.
         
         Or as Horace paraphraseth:
         
            Which Conquerour of Troy, had many seene
            Of Cities, and in many places beene:
            Which by providing for his sottish Crew,
            Himselfe into ful many Troubles drew.
            
               
And yet by strict observance of whats past
            Through many waves, saw his owne home at last.
         
         As it were exemplarily treading out the pathes of the most grave Philosophers, and Travaling to learne experience, and teach prudence. Not as many braine-sicke Travellours doe in these times; which live from day to day, as the proverbe is; and being overheated by a furious brain, doe skip inforraigne Countries, without method or discretion, from one place to another: or inflamed with an incessant desire of dancing up and downe, practise nothing else, but to advance their unruly and headlong passions. These a consideration

of their universall emptinesse both in braine and purse (any wise and prudent man would suppose) if they had but one Dramme of discretion, would send backe, although with loss into their Countries. Infinite numbers of which summer Birds, that are onely like swallowes or Cuckowes, good for the sack and smoke in the chimnies, doe so overheate themselves with hot exotique wines and fruits, perpetually gowstering on the French or Italian delicates, that scarce one of 10 returneth home alive. How many at the assault of the Groine and Lisbone, when Don Antonio the base would have recovered Portugal, were sent unto their latest homes in a

forraigne soile by heedlesse devouring of out-landish foode; here numbers dyed (as one speaketh) and distempers were Conquerours over the English Victors. The same fortune run many of our young lusty merchants and marriners In Iava, at Bantam; at the Moluccaes, Amboina, Banda, the gulfe of Bengala, Coromandel, Pegu, Tenussery, Mocasser, Achen, Sumatra, Zeilan, and finally in all those hot Countries of China and Iapon; which doe overthrow your health with the hot fruits of those Countries, and by excessive drinking of a strong wine, Called Arecca, Common throughout all the east, and with the contagious women, and almost as Contagious

heat of the Country. And many (if not to many) are those, which wearied with the delights of their owne Country, see Italy, Spaine, France, upon as hard conditions: which besides the Inconvenience of French affronts, and Rodomantodo duels, spanish Inquisitions, and Italian suspitions (with Naples buttons sometimes to boot) run them into many irrecoverable hazards. Pity it is (saith a discreet Travellour) that the parents, tutours; guardians, and friends will permit, much lesse egge on rash inconsiderate hot headed spirits, and vaine glorious brain-sick youths; whose only studies at home hath beene their cup, pipe and some butterfly Vanities, from the fryingpan

into the fire; from Domesticall into forraign madnesse; as though the change of Ayre for a feav'rish body & an ill temperd mind, were to be preferred neere the seaside, when as Horace rightly sayeth,
         
            Those which beyond the sea doe run
            Ill taught, the climate only change
            But not their minds, now quite undone
            Since they were suffred thus to rage.
         
         For if the most Crafty Vlisses himself could scarce after Innumerable hazards, and losse of his companions, see the smoke fume out his owne palace in Ithaca, and was knowne by none of his friends, except by one old mastiffe (which it seem'd liv'd longer then curres doe now a daies) what shall wee think of their unhappy courses,

which having neither wit, age, nor experience; ruine all their patrimony at home, and cannot spare, when they most abound? Certainely such brainsick skippers (as Lipsius speaketh) are like to returne more fooles then they went forth. For such endeavour not to make better their minds faculties; but only desire to jette up and downe, that they may know the length of the waies, and the names of the cities. There ought therfore to be limits, and bounds set before these travellers, or rather Skippers, that may opportunely keepe them in the path way of discretion.
         The first limit therefore ought to be, the Consideration of our purpose; and to what end (as the

Poet speaketh, we are ordained, what the order of things is, what Course of life wil befit us; what may be the vocation of our necessity and Inclination.
         Also whether it bee convenient for our naturall addictions, the health of our bodies, the profit of our affaires, and the manner of our Conversation to travell. Then it is necessary to observe into what kind of regions, and sorts of men we are to passe: as also what things are necessary for such a resolution: and in all these circumstances we must take great care least we bee deceaved. That which followes is that we must have a regard of welsetling those things we leave behind us, and not (as some doe)

ought wee to thinke, that our estates will follow us from one land unto another. There must be some certaine end (as Persius saith) unto which wee must direct our actions, and a certaine marke or scope to be aimed at, must alwaies be before us. The longest day hath a night following, which Cometh although slowly, yet at length it arriveth by degrees. The long Iourney too hath an end, and breatheth into a fainting period it being the generall aime of all discreet Travellours, there to dy, where they have beene borne, to end their lives in their native soile although, as the Ancient Poet hath it.
         
            To heaven still, we find an equall way
            
               
Whither at home, or else abroad we stay.
         
         Yet (as Tully speaketh) our Country hath in it a certaine inticing sweetnesse, and delight, that young men oftentimes doe affect the very beames of those houses in which they were borne. Wherefore let every discreet Travellour, build or settle some mansion in his owne Country, if he be able; that he may be the more gratefully receaved at his returne: otherwise he is rather an exile then a Travellour, neither travelleth such an one that he may come home more sufficient, and better instructed: but if he repasse by chance, that he may appeare more desperate, and unhappy. Or oftentimes it happeneth,

that he which contemneth, and Slighteth his Country, is slighted also by his Country. Therefore let each Travellour settle his affaires, as well, as he may, before his departure. For in his owne Country and family each wise man doth use first to begin Vniformity.
         These things being warily observed, it is necessary to purge the mind from the dreggs of ill humours, and violent passions: and first of those innate bitternesses, which with their fharpenesse infect each thing we taste: next those impolished crudities, which may disgust forraigne nations. For every severall clymate hath amongst the ruder sort of Inhabitants some humours,

and whimsies predominant; which carry with them a distast being Iudged by the palate of a stranger. so the French are accompted vnconstant and rash; the Spaniards proud, and vaineglorious; the Italian suspitious and revengefull; the Germans, blockish and heavy; the Sicylians, Luxurious and effeminate; the Polonian, barbarous and insolent; the Russe, Cruell, and yet parasiticall; the Hungarian, furious and distasteful. Generally also the Europeans are dreadlesse and rash, the Asians slothfull and effeminate; the African subtile and mercilesse; the American savage and heathenish. Our extravagant humours therefore, when we Travell are to be

polished with the rasor of a mild and well qualified temper, that a man may Converse with forreigners, without shame to his Countreymen, or offence to strangers. For nothing, in my opinion is more dangerous, and madde then for a Travellour in strange regions to commit those things, which being not fitted to the civility and custome of the places, he converseth in, may call into question the genius of his Country, and the Ability of his owne discretion; so that if any sudden affront or mischance happen, he may seeme to beare it deservedly, whilst his owne ill carriage may be made the occasion of his unhappy successe.
         It is therefore a very necessary

and considerable worke for all discreet Travellours to cleare themselves of the burthen of unnecessary passions before they depart from home. For it is a very difficult matter to polish ones education in that place, where all the faculties of nature are so put out of order, that scarcely our best endeavours can free our selves from many hazards, and inconveniences. For aptly doth agree to many, which neglect this rule, that saying of the Poet Horace:
         
            They change of totimes the clime
            not manners, which doe passe
         
         Their Country shoares???Yea often (as Seneca hath it) passions, the fraileties and Infirmities of humane nature do most frequently follow

those wanderers, which depart from their Country out of a vaine wearinesse or Curiosity: whilest those sincere abilities which they possessed at home are infected with Exotique contagions. Neither are those passions eased or cured by time, which are rather increased by practising. Trifles. And in another place the same learned and judicious Philosopher: Thou art about to change thy Country: but observe, if by avoiding that, thou canst avoide thy selfe; and not rather contrariwise; thou bearest not about thee, the aggravation of thy mischievous passions.
         As those which are sicke of a feaver unquietly tosse, and tumble

themselves about, vainely hoping for ease: so many times doe those, which being sicke and diseased in their minds change climates, desiring to remedy their ungoverned affections. For this is the way rather to uncover, then to take away the disease: to confesse & betray this inward heare, and not to heale it. Elegantly saith the Roman wise man: It is the property of a sick man to endure nothing long, but rather to use changes as remedies. Hence are those wandring peregrinations undertaken, and many shoares passed over, and sometimes by land, other times by sea, over-wearied inconstancy contemning her pleasant

abode, is imployed. Such therefore doe rather fly away from, then avoide troubles, as that hart in Virgill.
         
            Whom 'mongst the Cressian Forrests with a dart
            The huntesman wounds: he feeling once the smart
            Flies swist away, & to the woods is gone,
            The Cretan woods, and now forgets his home.
         
         But yet this flight is but to little purpose, because as the same Poet addes.
         
            Vnto his side doth sticke
            The barbed dart, which first his ribbs did prick.
         
         Therefore before a discreet travellour doth undertake any Iourney or Peregrination, he

ought to reduce his passions to to the rule of Tranquillity; that so he may walke in the pathes of reason, and felicity. Let his Course also looke generally upon that which is vertuous: For that which in it selfe is honest, is profitable for all men: as the observation of customes, habits, rites, governments of those men and commonwealths which we see; which ought not to be negligently forgotten, or supinely observed. And therefore most wisely did those Ancients, and amongst our later travellours, some few of the most judicious, which did commit to their briefe note-books the adventures of each day: and the notable Acts of each weeke

to their diaries, Kalendars & Ephemerides; from the concise magazine of which smal library, they might (in Macrobius his sence) as from a store-house, drawne out plenty of provision, to put of the famine or barrennesse of oblivion, or their confused memorials. For the Table book, and this briefe kind of writing, is the index & life of memory; and may be made the Ingenions inlargement, of those things, which new matter may consu??mate, and finish. Vpon this grasse let each laborious oxe ruminate, that at length, he may be be able to tread out the pure and solid Corne of observation. And least the forme of this kind of observation may halt, in a Iudicious

Travellour ought to instruct his mind with the arts (amongst which painting and limming are of best accompt) and liberall sciences, that with their aide and direction, their notes may be reduced to a methodicall order and forme. Not after the manner of some ignorant Triflers, which while they want matter, and vdnerstanding, gather together heapes of vanities; or being blinded with faction and prejudice only sort but such thinges, which are pleasing to their passions, and the Current of the times; utterly neglecting, and refusing those things, which may either rectify the error, or amend their iudgement, but how to

support these jnjudicious wanderers, the generall Topiques which follow may not unfitly be observed.
         Now therefore will I endeavour to signe out limits, which may regularly direct those, which purpose to touch upon forraigne shoares. It shall be therefore necessary for those which enter a strange Country, to observe these two things; with whom to remaine, and in what place. For some, whilest they passe not to the chiefest and most noted places of the Countrey they now are in, but to some sordid and meant Townes, rather seeke a lurking for corner their ignorance, then a place for instruction. A stranger

therefore must labour and endeavour, (if he may without any great inconvenience) to seeke the chiefe seat and head of the Kingdome, wherein he resideth; neither that, in any violent hast, but by degrees: that the Iuice of his understanding may draw unto it the manners of the Inferiour regions, and in a manner naturalize them, that so more safely and easily, he may arrive at the summe of his wishes. Aptly doth Tacitus teach vs this necessity in the sixth booke of his Annals Chap. 8. instancing of Phraates the Parthian, which being placed in the roome of Artabanus by the Emperor Tiberius, whilest over suddenly he leaveth his Roman Customes, and followeth

the guise of the Parthians, he being not able to brook so suddaine a change, falleth sick and dyeth. In the same manner one Tho Randolph in Queen Elizabeths time being Embassador to Ivan Vasilonoch Emperour of Moscovia, reporteth himselfe to have narrowly avoided death or extreame sicknesse, which he had gotten, by changing his English habit overquickly into a Russian apparell. For the sodaine change of any habituated Custome, is so dangerous, that sometimes ordinary things disused bring on the necessity of death. Wherefore by degrees, the forces of custome are to be mollifyed or hardned according to the nature and customes

of the place, to which we intend to Travell, that when we come to the mature places of observation; we may shew no infections of bitternesse and spleene. This preparation being orderly practised, we ought to proceed warily to the chiefest places of the Kingdome. I call not those places the chiefest, wher?? the Court doth usually reside, (which sometimes chooseth the most pleasant, not famous places) but those Cities, which are most ancient, populous, noble, best served with merchandizes, and if thou hast any smacke of learning, where there is some Academy; as in France, Paris, and Monpellier; in Italy, Rome Bonona, and Padua: in

Spaine Toledo and Salamanca; in Germany Strausburg, and Basill: from the happy concurrence of which famous places, not only all sorts of exquisite learning but the very genius of urbanity, and civility; and the sum of all profitable Conversation is to be enjoyed. In which places commerces of all sorts are used, the Treasure of all humane knowledge is layed up, and all other conveniences to advance a Travailour to the height of civill knowledge are to be found out. Here also are not only bookes Containing all sciences, (which may perhaps not over please, the unstable heads of some jetting passengers) but the most humane and lively Volumes

of famous men; whose discourses, exercises, and polite conversations (if they be seriously admitted into a mans minde) are the best epitomes of those regions. In such places, as in the Cyerhan groves, and Parnassean hils, a Travellour resolving to stay; he ought so to frame and settle himselfe, that his mind be not precipitate, and unconstant, and so may loose, by to nimble and frequent motion, its due and observable considerations: and least by to nimble departing out of the right path of Iudgement, it may not shew the sudden Capacity of an Ingenious, understanding, but the heady rashnesse and too apprehensive wearinesse ofa stable happinesse.
         
            
To this observation, succeedeth, that a Travellour having Conversation, with learned men, should first rather endeavour to learne, then be ready to speake, and to understand then to teach. First it is a great and especiall hinderance of wisedome to speake much; and to desire the opinion of a ready orator, without knowledge or sufficiency. For pride and a bolder Carriage then usuall, are vices most contrary to the humility of Instruction; which vices striving to send forth the sounds of an arrogant expression, often shew a selfe love and ignorant vanity in the speaker. We must therefore labour to observe with a gentle, and quiet behaviour, being qualified

rather, with the desire of Instruction, then, wearied with the distast of information. Neither (as many doe) let us thinke our selves in the gallery, before we are entered into the parlour. For many (as Seneca well adviseth,) had arrived unto the perfection of learning; if they had not supposed themselves perfect to soone. This evill is to be avoided, because it is most common, and yet not so common as dangerous. For now a daies nothing is so usuall, as for some proud, swelling, empty, unskilfull gul gallant to fall into the extremity of arrogant babling; and being intoxicated with the heat of vaine glory, and selfe love, to boile out trifles,

and ridiculous language. And although this vice be to be abhorred every where, as a mischiefe which is a very great enemy, unto all quiet and sober communication; yet especially it is to be shunned by a Travellour into forraigne Countries, unto whom all things ought to seeme strange, and new; unlesse he desire to appeare imprudent, or at at leastwise improvident. And therefore Lipsius speaketh aptly: Almost every man of the meanest sort can babble, wander, discourse foppishly, and ramble without feare or wit from one place to another: but few can learne and search with quietnesse and discretion; which is the true end of

Travelling. Refer therefore more to thy Instruction, and sufficiency reall, then to the vaine glorious ostentation of babling, and to that infectious itch of immethodicall prating. Neither unfitly only doth the over-nimble discourser in forraigne Countries let slip his words, but sometimes dangerously. For it is a very hard thing for a man that talketh much, sometimes not to faile: although he knoweth the matter of which he discourseth: but it is imposible for a man which knoweth not the manners and customes of the men and place before whom and where he is, to deliver his minde, not to erre and sometimes most grossely to be deceaved. Therefore

let every wise Travellour, with as much care as he may, sacrifice unto the two shrines, to wit, of memory and silence: to memory, that he may hold fast all things, which are good and profitable (for he shall according to the phrase of Martiall, see some few good things, many indifferent, and very many ill examples:) and that also he may refuse the things, which are not Convenient for a well nurtured education to follow: like those strong and profitable scaines or nets, which reserve the great and large fishes, but let the worthlesse small fry drop backe againe into the sea. Let him also sacrifice to silence, if not equally, yet in a plentifull measure,

because he which according to the Poet, is like water in a sieve, is to full of holes to reserve with judgement any matter of important consequence. But thou art ready to reply; or rather peremptorily question me. Dost thou prohibit a Travellour to use thebenefit of his Tonuge, which is most acceptable to most men, and often serveth better then a carvoch to passe away the dull houres. I answer, that my purpose is not to stop their mouthes, which with discretion can bridle their discourse: but only thus much I admonish thee, that thou beest not a perpetuall utterer of thy owne concernements. Take liberty (in gods name, faith a wise man;)

of speaking, not only on the way, but in the Inne, if thou findest fit company: yea in any convenient place, neither only before supper, but at, and after it. But let thy speech tend to some one of these ends; which seeke and enquire of the manners, lawes, site, and condition of each city; I adde, which discourse of the Princes, warres Events, and whatsoever is rare and unusuall. But alwaies thinke more wisedome to be placed in few then many words, so the questions be apposite and pithy. Seeke and enquire therefore rather like a scholler, then like a Teacher. Discourse of other mens actions, resound not thy owne

knowledge or vaine glorious praises.
         For that Travellour, which can abstaine from any glosse of his owne commendations, cometh neere the rundell of perfection, and is both happy, and Iudicious. To the discreet modesty of which elocution, two observations do occur: the first is alwaies to endeavour (if thou hast not given thy name unto the muses and their instructions, whereby to increase, or at least wise lay the foundation of the neighbouring languages) to get the acquaintance of honest and learned men. From these many helpes may be easily obtained. For by their meanes thou shalt be able to view and understand, all the

ancient and moderne monuments, worthy the sight in the citys thou passest, thou shalt have the entrance into the most famous libraries, schooles, and Colledges, and see, not only the outward furniture, but the inmost riches, of those happy receptacles: besides by the company of these, thou shalt avoide all those circumforaneous and light headed ramblers, which insinuate themselves, and their companies into the society of unbridled young Travellours, and often, by the corrupting of the manners, lead them into all manner of hazard. For most True is that sentence of a learned moralist: All those which indulge Luxurious Courses, doe decline a follower

of Learning, and ingenuitie with a kind of detestation. And this great Commodity, shall they also, obtaine, by this happy conversation: thatthey shall (if they will) rectify, what before hath beene in their manners amiste. For learning often doth profit more, by destroying that which before was corrupt, then by implanting after the emendation of our natures, that which is sincere; it being alwaies a greater labour to cleare, a woody and marish Country and to prepare, it then to sow it. If this be so, how much importeth it a wary & experienced judgement (but most of all a raw and greene one,) to desire the company of learned and honest men; by whose

conversation; a mans minde is oftner wholesomely instructed, then vainely delighted? Notwithstanding all these conveniences, most people of this latter age, doe strictly desire such company, and name those, most commonly, good fellowes, and boone associates, which please them with ridiculous passages, and whet their Luxuririous fancies, by flattering their effeminate Inclinations: and abhorre those assoure, and distastefull, which with their grave and serious admonitions open a way to vertue, and shut the passadges of vice: when contrariwise every discreet man, chuseth, a friend, as one would doe a medicine for his health, the more sharpe, the more

sounde. And besides; Not only there is no benefit gotten, by consorting with foolish and deboist Company, but rather an infinite heape of mischiefes; whilest from their frivolous, and infectious discourse, the hearers draw mudde, rather then water; and take pains to quench their thirst, not in a river, but a Poole. For rightly sayd that wise man Seneca, We sooner accustome our selves to learne the ill qualities of those, which are indifferently good, then their vertues. So Alexander the great (as Quintilian reporteth,) drew some vitious Imitations, from his master Leonidas, which being a valiant and martiall Emperour, he could not shake off. Marcus Tullius also

recordeth of some fantasticall Rhetoricians, which being not able to expresse, the severall graces, and exellencies of their tutours, endeavoured only to follow, and imitate, such frivolous gestures, which were most unproper for either of them. So easily doe most men fall downewards, and so prompt and ready a thing it is, to decline from the rough way of rough and laborious progresse of vertue, into the obvious path of vice and slothfullnesse. True therefore is that saying of Nilus, The first passages of vertue, and Ingenious proceedings seeme hard unto the disciple, because the nature of man from it's very Infancy, is conversant in all license and idlenesse;

but to those which armed with noble resolution, have pssed unto the middest of this steepe ascent; the way seemeth altogether light and easy. For our ill manners being better qualifyed, with the mixture of good customes, at the length are quite abolished with the memory of those pleasures, which abhorre from reason. Of the force and unhappy prevalency of this slothfull custome, another learned moralist named Diadochus hath these words. Great is the force of Custome, as well in society as in all other things. For out of use proceedeth a habit, from a habit ariseth a naturall necessity. Which to change ismost hard, nay sometimes

impossible. It behoveth him therfore which desireth to travaile with profit, and safetie, neither much to desire company, nor (yet) to mixe with confused troopes; or yet to ramble to every meeting of strange and vnknowne persons. For the going abroad upon small occasions, consumeth most pretious time; and the conversing with every triviall companion, either draweth foolish and dangerous tautology; or enticeth a man from those disciplines and exercises, which before he addicted himselfe unto without hinderance. Let therefore a wise man abstaine from the ordinary and confused company

of men, and let him endeavour to consort himselfe with those, from whom he may receave profitable information. For it doth often happen, that those which are strangers, and doe without much warinesse deliver their mindes and opinions, are often ensnared by some certaine crafty Promoters or Informers, which often Oh how true is this. take away not only such trifles as ones purse, monie and raiment: but also when they have done that and much more, these men being conscious of their own unworthinesse and obnoxious to the torments of an unquiet conscience, they intice the secure prater into some

velitation or strife of language, which being by them craftily exaggerated, at length grows into or produces a capitall crime. And so often perisheth with his unprofitable, and rowling eloquence, that unhappy travellour, whose aime and vaine-glory, is to be knowne & honored by his rowling tongue. Let therfore every man, which pretendeth to enjoy the least dramme of discretion, judiciously and advisedly consider what, and before whom hee intendeth to speak: neither let him weigh only his conscience, the plaine meaning and sence of those things which he is about to declare; but the consequence

of those things he purposeth to discourse on, and the fidelity of the hearers before whom those flying words are to be let slipp. For there are many, especially in forraigne Nations (amongst whom much is consecrated to guile, and little to honesty) which are of soe heady and forward a malice, that they study, endeavour, and labour nothing more, then to entice men into the snares of hasty language, from the dangerous implications of which, a sodaine ruine may like some quick flashes of lightning, arise. Therefore let every wary Travellour; set a watch upon his lipps, (which Homer calleth septum Dentium) sive 
            
            , although hee may seeme able to discourse, subtly, eloquently, and politely, yea and perhaps, without offence of the hearers. For amongst many the very nimblenesse, and affable curiosity of the Wit, stirreth up malice; and those which thinke to excell others, and to gaine a generall admiration from their hearers, or rather spectators, are not seldome rent, into many disgraces, by the biting and venemous teeth of snarling envy.
         Notwithstanding a meane ought to bee imposed upon this suspition, only before the unknowne rabble let this caution be exactly observed. But

if thou hast (perhaps) gotten a bosome friend, a man whom thou hast observed to be discreet, and cordiall; and such an one, whom thou hast tyed unto thy affaires, with the eternall bands of affection; open thy minde to this man; but discreetly and warily: proceeding after the manner of Scipio the African, with his friend Servilius, as Ennius reporteth.
         
            About to speake, he cal's his friend, with whome
            Oft lovingly and freely at his home
            He had discours'd, (when oft the day grew late,)
            Of things were done, where that the Senate sate.
            
               
To whom most freely he might talke his minde
            And of all businesse a sure closet finde.
            With whom he pleasure great had tane, and Ioy;
            Whose noble soule no sentence bad can sway.
            A man that mild is, learned, faithfull, just,
            Of nature sweet, that never brake his trust.
            Of tongue facile and fluent, and content
            With that which is his owne, and fairly spent.
            Discreet, and speaking in good season, all
            That he attempts to utter; which can call
            
               
To minde old and new actions, and can finde
            For secrets, a close harbour in his minde.
         
         If thou hast the good fortune to obtaine, so true a picture of friendship, as this description doth afford, thou mayst not feare to trust those secrets unto his safe custody; which may discreetly be permitted for a faithfull man to know. Yet ought good caution to be used, least that our Iudgement be deceaved, and lest under the cover of friendship, may be hidden, the enticing and dangerous practises of a malitious enemy. Poisons are often given (saith Hierom) covered with hony, and those

vices often deceave, wich are adorned outwardly with the shape of vertues, Ovid speaketh rightly.
         
            A safe and common way it is, for to deceave,
            Vnder pretence of love which true love doth bereave.
         
         And to the same purpose Lucretius:
         
            For as the Narses which to children give
            Troubled with wormes those vermin to derive
            The bitter Century root, doe touch the cuppe
            About the brims with a delitious suppe:
            That so the silly knowledge of the child
            
               
May drinke the bitter potion, made thus mild.
         
         Even thus also doe these Quacksalvers of vitious and corrupt manners, endeavour to set of with faire outward appearances, those polluted actions, they endeavour to infect others withall. For the most impudent forehead cannot chuse but blush to commend any vice in its owne native vilenesse, and abhorre to invite men to these rockes of the Syrens, without the outward Tinctures of custome and luxury. Wherefore with great caution and most diligent observation, let that friend (what soever he may appeare) with whom thou meanest

to participate thy counsels, be heeded: because true friendship is rightly conglutinated, and ioyned amongst none, but those which be equalls; and although one may be unequall before this knot, yet doth it allwaies after this reciprocall affection, equalize them into the same degree of fortune, and correspondence: rightly therefore speaketh that eloquent Roman Lawyer. Minutius faelix: Friendship doth alwaies either finde or make men equalls. And St. Hierom let a particular man glister with golden robes, and from his large chestes, let his shining plate be produced. Charity cannot be exceeded; love and

affection are not to be bought with money: Friendship which once can end, hath never beene true or sincere. Thence also hath proceeded that ancient proverbe of the Greekes; That all things amongst friends are common: because the parity and equality of their minds doth so communicate all outward goods of fortune, that the greatnesse of the one can never be a hinderance unto the meanesse of the other. But this parity of mindes, seemes rather to proceede, from the source of their common inclination to vertue, and not from the contrary apparent quality. Which consent is so rare, and in a manner so

impossible to find, that we may easily conjecture the hardnesse of it from this one demonstration. For who almost amongst the generall and moderne sort of people, doth not desire to creepe into his neighbours secrets with the intent to destroy him, with a subtle and crafty intention, being rather armed for ruine, then prepared to require the mutuall aide, and helpe of a friend? Many faire glozes and shewes may be ready (perhaps) amongst the company of our equalls, many plausible, and enticing pretences; Oh how either of favour with true! superiour magistrates, by interposing some efficacious

petitio??, or by directing our familiar affaires, in a seeming smooth Course; which subtleties are wonderfully affected, by those which rather desire to abandon, then to seeke cordially for true friendship: Whereby they may perswade raw young men, that they are most honest and right hearted good natures, and perhaps by these sleights, they may purchase the opinion of wise men, being the more able by these jugglings to set upon the secure innocent, now over confident of their fidelities: when at the same moment in their hearts reigneth all sort of guile, envy, malice, hatred, emulation and heart-burnings, which like

the Trojans out of the fatall horse of Epeus, doe with a number of most strange and sodaine calumniations, rush out upon their seeure enemy, and drive him into perpetuall ruine and despaire. What feare, amazement, griefe, and horrour falleth then upon those, which giving credit, unto these mens Syrenian enchantments, thought all their secrets, and open follies to be buried in oblivion. What teares, what mourning?
         
            When th' image of that sad night did appeare
            Which was the last time of our being beere.
         
         Therefore especially beware, unto whom and what thou speakest,

and whom thou choosest to be thy bosome friend. Yea playing any game with thy own brother by Hesiods direction.
         
            ???A Witnesse choose
            Least thou his love, or else thy money loose.
         
         Consider therefore maturely before thou plightest the troth of mutuall affection with any man, unto whom thou dost trust thy selfe. For acutely of this Cautele speaketh Theogonis in his learned morall directions to his friend.
         
            About thy friendship my mind troubled is,
            Whither in love or hatred I may misse.
         
         These passages so obnoxious

to dangers (perhaps) the too secure reader wil hardly beleeve; saying it is the property of a minde vexing it selfe before necessity doth require, to wait and expect it's owne dangers; often using that sentence of the ancient Poet.
         
            He that death in health doth feare,
            Looseth all his quiet here.
         
         Iudging it also to be an easier condition not to live at all, then to be coop'd up with so many Circumstances and considerations. And as those, which are tortured by unskilfull and slow Physitions, would rather perish by the head strong obedience, unto their owne inflamed appetites, and irregular disgestion,

then live according to those precepts, which are the means of health. So these improvident men would rather permit all their affaires to meere chance, and the uncertaine current of the times, then to regulate themselves, in choosing the demonstrations of experience. To these men puffed up with the opinion of their own sufficiency (that I may passe over the sluggish heaviness of others) we write not; nor greedily desire those mens tastes; whose stomackes being already filled with crude humours, doe not only contemne (as the Poet speaketh) ordinary viands, but soone disgust the purest elixar of philosophy. To these I say,

I propose not the hard fates of sundry armies, regions, cities, Ilands, which have sodainly perished, with to much confidence and presumption ossecurity. But before these mens faces I exhibite the idea of their conversations, selected out of choice and true Histories; which have brought upon themselves sodaine deaths, and most unfortunate ruines, by over: much trust unto those which have deceaved their professions, and carryed two faces under one hood. Let therefore any supine or negligent frequenter of every publique society they meet, look upon the conspiracy of Vibulenus against Blaesus mentioned in the first booke of

Cornelius Tacitus his Annals: and afterwards let him observe, the fained and guilefull friendship of Caepio Crispinus, towards his Praetor of Bythinia, Granius Marcellus: who having receaved from him, both encrease of many honours, and divers other benefits, because he could Not to his owne desires encrease his fortunes, accused his friend unto that most cruell Emperour. Tiberius, that he spoke ill against and inveighed at the wicked and dissolute life of the Emperour. This mans ill example (faith Cor. farther) did Romanus Hispo, and many others follow; which enquiring into many mens lives and

actions, did continually search about for some occasion, whereby to feede the cruell desires of their Tyrannicall Prince. Hence (saith my author) many poore rascalls following this promoter, became rich, which by these base and unworthy practises from the most meane places of birth and fortune, lifting up their heads, were upon a sodaine growne to be most powerfull and fortunate. Turne to the 7. chap. of the second booke of Annals, and there thou fhalt find Libo Drusus accused of treason by his most intimate and familiar friend Firmus Cato. Drusus (it is the historians report) by his ill and deboist

example, this Cato, enticed and lead on to all lasciviousnesse; and afterwards drew him into debt; and engaged his land in morgages and usury: And most faithfully for a Time did he deale with this his friend in their common affaires; untill he had gotten firme arguments and witnesses to make good what he perfidiously intended. These being once ready he openeth his accusation unto Fla. Vescularius, and thus under the appearance of Friendship, through most ignoble treachery, he brought his friend into the most hard extremity, he possibly could devise. But the desperate youth suspecting and beginning to vent this persidious

accusation, declined into that height of griefe and passion, that he ran himselfe through the body with his owne rapier. But this moderne example related by Samuell Bruno in his Portugall voyage; is a most exact testimony of the infidelity of many which make faire shewes and professe, at the beginning of their acquaintance, much secrecy. There is a law (saith Bruno) in Spaine, that it is lawfull for no man whatsoever (except those merchants which bring corne or other necessary provision into the Country) to carry thence any coine stamped in the Kings mint: He which transgresseth this law without redemption

is sold, and bound to the oare as a gally-slave; (and) his goods and ship confiscated. It fortuned at my being at Lisbone there rode in the Haven 4. ships; two of Roterdam, one of Enchuisen, and one also of Ackerslought, in these there was hidden besides many gemmes of the orientall Indies, great store of coined money. Three of the ships assoone as they might, hoised saile and departed without discovery. But the fourth, (being one of the Roterdam, ships) staied unfortunately behind. For the master or chiefe marchant of that ship, by name Cornelius Hoppo, a man well thought on, and of good estiestimation

amongst his Country men, had entertained a young fellow for his scribe or secretary, which at the first appearance seemed to be very towardly, and discreet: but was indeed a very malitious, and insolent natur'd fellow. This scribe a little before their intention of departure, entreated his master to lend him 500 Rials of 8. which (because he refused to give an accompt how he meaned to dispend them,) being denied, he most malitiously and treacherously forthwith repaired to the magistrate, accusing his master, and other of his Countrymen for carrying away coined silver against the Law. Vpon this

accusation; forthwith foure Spanish gallies filled with armed souldiers, are directed to search the ship, which forthwith they did, found the moneys, and tooke away the other merchandise. But yet this base promooter had no share of the prize (according to the law, which assigneth a third part to the accuser) so that in this part, the proverbe was verifyed. The treason is often well liked, when the traitour is not regarded. This ship was after sold, by the governour unto some merchants of Germany. Thus far Bruno. Not unlike is that practise of Hen. Greens mentioned in Abacuck

Pricket his voyage recorded in Mr. Pur. Pilgrims; who was kindly entertained (as ascribe) by Hen. Hudsen; to serve in his last Northwest discovery, and at length betraied Hudson his sonne, and many more to the mercilesse element of the sea, or the more mercilesse Torment of hunger. The history is worth a reading and over-large to be in this place inserted. To these (besides what ordinary experience may afford) I could adde infinite store of examples out of T. Livius, C. Tacitus; Val. Maxumus; Amm. Marcellinus, and of publike calamities out of the Stratagems polemicall of Iul. Frontinus; but that already I have stayed to long

upon this evident observation, which must rather be the fruite of experience then of History: bing rather contented to signe the very limits of the right passage of profitable travell, then to be troublesome all the way with overmuch chat; knowing in Lucretius his similitude,
         
            That the rare seldome tone of the pure swan
            Is better then all clamour that ere came
            From the loquacieus Cranes???
         
         Onely thus much let me adde by way of corollary, unto the former observation, that there are no Snares or Oh how true! dangers more full of ruine, then

those which proceed, and draw their beginnings, from the Inventions, and practices of our friends, servants, clients, sons, nay (which is scarce credible amongst many,) from the secret plots and machinations of those which desire to appeare our most loving, and complacent wives. For rightly said Cicero, when he assured his brother; that those evils are the most dangerous, which proceed from Domestique Authors. Truly speaketh also the satyricall Poet, in this rather wholesomely bitter, then scurrilously satyricall.
         
            Oh Corydon Corydon! thinkest thou there may bee
            A secret in a rich mans house thats free?
            
               
For if the servants hold their peace and speak
            Nothing at all, yet will his Cattell breake
            Into a wild relation: dogs, nay posts
            Will before day declare to the next hostes
            What he but thought at midnight: and will heare
            What the head Cook, and Clarke said o're their beere.
            For (thinkest thou these doe feare t'invent a crime
            Against their master? if at any time
            They may by Rumours those tough blowes once save
            Or else revenge them, which their master gave
            Nay rather then they'l secret keepe, what they
            
               
But Chance for to suspect, they'l slip away
            And hunt the Corners of the streets, to heare
            Or tell, what he doth in his wine or beere.
            Aske these therefore what from me thou wouldst know;
            They hold their peace: nay rather they will shew
            A secret, then to drinke in private up
            Of stollen wine, or the best Ale a cup.
            We rightly ought to leade our lives for these
            And many causes; but least that we leese
            Our reputation, is the speciall cause
            That should well teach us, rather then the lawes.
         
         
            
And in the sixth concerning the humorous condition of the other part of a family, namely a wife; not unfitly the Satyre hath discoursed. For
         
            There hardly is a woman to be - found
            That will not on each small occasion sound
         
         Louder then many clockes???And the ancient Poet Hesiod giveth them this right character.
         
            Then a good woman nothing better is
            For to be had; or to compleate our blisse.
            Againe then an expensive wife there's not
            A fire more surious, or a flame more hot.
            A fire that roasteth men, without a brand:
            
               
A flame that soone consumeth goods and land.
         
         Generally is this corollary comprized by Petrarch in his Epistle unto Andreas the Bishop of Bononia. There is nothing, quoth he, amongst all the difficulties of our life more hard to be kept in order, then fidelity. Therefore thou shalt perceave those which live with thee, seldome merry, often sorrowfull, never equall in their addictions, but alwaies various. I feare that saying of Seneca to Lucilius: Nothing sooner doth vanish, and grow distastefull, then affection. I feare: that verse or exclamation of Vergil the prince of the latine poets.
         
            O harmefull love! no wight can tell;
            
               
What thou men too, dost oft compell!
         
         Wherefore if to a man purposing to remaine in his owne Country, such dangers, snares, and entrapments are created by his owne people; nothing is more to be avoided by a Travellour then too much openesse especially if he have no friend, but such as Bias the Philosopher did use to choose, whom he againe might upon occasion hate: and if he suspecteth danger amongst some unknowne people as amongst wild and dangerous beasts These observations although he observe, yet let him avoide to expresse them in his countenance, gesture, or regard;

either yet let him suffer them to appeare in that sparing discourse, he doth sometimes use: especially let him decline to shew any diffidence or distrust of those, with whom he more familiarly converseth at Table, or at leastwise any distast of their manners. For nothing is more inhumane, indiscreet or more undecent then to browbeat those which (bee they strangers, or otherwise) sit neere us at Table, or discourse with us familiarly. For by this meanes a Travellour outwardly designeth himselfe to be possessed with pusillanimity, and unworthy feare, and by his to humble submission armeth against

his throat, and reputation the sword and weapon of every cut-throat: let him rather colour all exception with the various coverture of affability, and civill courtesy; That nothing may appeare in him obscure, blew, or truculent, but that he may seeme to all festive, yet adorned with a certaine becomming gravity; that in his countenance may be discerned the vigor of a moderate, and well qualified spirit, mixed with a nimble and heroique influence. Suetonius relateth of Augustus caesar, that he had eyes of so majestique a quality, that he seemed to dart from them, the very raies of Majeftie. The

same is storied of Theodosius 1. by AEmilius Probus, in the dedication of that little (compend) commentary concerning the the lives of the most famous Generals, by some ascribed unto Cor: Nepos; where he speaketh unto his booke in this manner.
         
            Feare not (my little booke) his yellow haire
            Encircled with a sparkling Crowne. But dare
            For to salute his bright majestick eyes
            Which carry splendour, like the Serene skyes.
         
         Titus also Vespasian from his Comitie mixed with his well tempered aspect, was called the very delight of the nations. So also

also in his Panegyrique Pliny reporteth of Trajan, pag: 5, that he had an incredible dignity in his countenance; of whom Sex. Aurelius Victor reporteth, that he so caryed himselfe in the administration of the Imperiall affaires that the most admirable wits of the best writers can scarse expresse the dignity of his actions; so farre is it from the truth that Plinie did flatter this Prince, it now being the summe of all good subjects wishes to desire, their soveraignes may enjoy the peaceable times of Augustus, and the vertues of Trajan. Claudian also speaking of the right noble & valiant generall Stilico hath these words.
         
            
               
Then (in thy youth) most gravely didst thou goe
            And yet most lively gestures didst thou show.
            Thy following happy actions were for spoke
            By those faire beames, thy eyelids from them broke:
            The severe Parthian nobles were amaz'd,
            At those full numerous aspects thou hast raisd:
            And Persian Caunes when they beheld a guest
            Like thee, have sighed, drinking at a Feast.
         
         The same hath these verses in the commendation of man: Theodorust
         
            
               
Thy eyes a temper keepe, whom neither rage
            Doth over sharpen, or confound thy age;
            Neither doth sudden tempests in thy face,
            The genuine favour of thy cheekes disgrace.
         
         And of Honorius,
         
            Thee the fayre Enipeus and thee wood
            Dodone once beholding, smiling stood:
            And those hard okes, which to Chaonians yeeld
            Their food, now seeing thee danc'd round the feild.
         
         On the other side, contrariwise Theocritus describes the unhospitall youth:
         
            He had no lustre in his looks, no flame
            
               
Of lively vigor ever warmd the same.
            But he observ'd all men, as doth the wild
            Beasts of the feild, or as a threatned child.
         
         All which sentences gathered to a head, shew us that this caution of mixing comity with vigor in our countenances, is both necessary, and becomming; for the forehead is (as it were) the Index of the minde, and often from the countenance may be conjectured that which is fixed in the soule. In this most worthy part are deposed (those) the most exact errors and perfections of nature, which frequently are the obscure significations of our ma??ners. The truth of which

sentence may be more fully gathered out of those bookes of Physyologie written by B. Porta: in the which, strange and rare conjectures (from the quality of the countenance) of our humane nature are comprized. Acutely and philosophically writeth C. Plinius in the 11. booke of his Nat: History. Only man (saieth he) hath a face, other creatures only have a mouth or beake. Other creatures have indeed a forehead, but only the forehead of a man sheweth mirth, or sorrow, anger or mercy. In the upper part of this are placed the browes, which only are moveable amongst men. These especically shew pride

and disdaine. In other places pride hath his conceptacle, or place of birth; but in these his abode. It is begotten in the heart; but it ascendeth hither, and heere hangeth; and is placed.
         Mixe therefore these signes in thy daily conversation which are able amongst forraigne, nay amongst barbarous nations to obtaine thee friendship and accesse, and avoid those rusticke, manners, which Tranio objecteth to his fellow slave in the ancient comedy. Mostell.
         G: quam confidenter loquitur? fue! T. At te Iupiter???diique omnes perdant! oboluisti allium Germana inluvies, Rusticus, Hircus, Hara

suis, Canis, Capra Commista! The words are to ranke for a translation. The avoidance of such unmannerly evacuations are best learned by experience; for they are as loathsome to any Ingenious man, as odious in their owne natures and qualities.
         This especiall caution being heedfully observed, it shall not be amisse to adde this part to the former, which being neglected, often bringeth incomparable dangers, upon the unwary travellour. Therefore a travellour must be admonished with especiall heed, that whilst he resideth amongst unknowne men in a forraigne Country, he

make not to bold, or be to inquisitive into their secret affaires.
         And this caution is for three especiall reasons, to be adhibited. First least by mingling some thing of our affaires, we may make our selves suspected to our owne Country: and so we may returne either unwellcome, or our returne be forbidden. Thus was Reginald Poole, and R. Allen both English Cardinals outlawed and proscribed, for dealing in forraigne affaires and seeking the ruine of their Country. Secondly least by over curiously enquiring of the holies, or secret politicall affaires of other nations, we may by chance let

fall some words, which may draw on an Inconvenience upon us, or may be ill taken by wise men. Most A strange History. strange is that relation, which S. Bruno a switzer and Chyrurgion to the fortresse of Nassaw in the East Indies hath committed to memory in his second African Iournall; which is not altogether unfitting to be applyed to this Topicall caution. Being not farre from the Promontory of Capo Monte amongst the AEthiopians or Negroes dwelling there abouts, he had heard his Cap. Thomas Peetersou a Flushinger say, that the devill of late had made in the adjoining woods a most horrible noise,

Imperiously requiring sacrifices to be performed unto him.
         Whereupon I enquired, where those sacrifices should be made; who told me hard by, in the adioyning grove: but that none would be admitted to the celebration of these infernall holies (but the King whose name was Thaba Flamor his nobles and counsellors.) At the day appointed I my selfe, quoth Bruno, heard a most inarticulate and hollow terrible noise: and saw how those woemen and children (which for the meanesse of their condition could not be admitted to the sacrifice,) ran away to their houses and caves with extreme feare. After this I

saw divers and many sortes and dishes of meat to be carried into the wood, as rice, venizon, hens, wine and a drinke called Mellicratos of an excellent taste. Being desirous to know whether this extraordinarie cheere was conveyed, I presently found a Companion of mine which had been in those places before: but assoone as the Ethiopians saw us come neere they howled out, extreamely threatning us, that if we did ofter to stirre one foot forward, without mercy their gods, (or rather devils) Suangi, and Cricry would teare us in pieces. We notwithstanding their menaces and threats came nearer, which the devill

perceaving and being unwilling to be troubled with the presence of any Christians, did so violently vrge his black coloured infernall servants, that they most grieviously beat S. Bruno and his companion, that they left them for dead in the place, yet notwithstanding they at last got home to the ships: and a while after resorted to Thaba t lamour the King, with their Captaine for satisfaction, telling that swarthy Monarch, that no merchants would hence forwards trade in his country, if the nation without due satisfaction should offer such cruel wrongs. The king having heard them out, told them that whatsoever had beene done,

was effected by the command of Cry cry alone; and that we could not with any reason complaine of injury. For since their nationall rites and holies did not pertaine to us; we rather ought to abstaine from the curious search thereof; because we came not thither for any devotion or good will, but rather to enquire of their ceremonies and deride them. Vpon the hearing of this speech, the Captaine was (contentedly) pacyfiyed, as supposing the contents to be not altogether unreasonable. The devill had perswaded this miserable King, that he should fly from place to place after his death, and be his inseparable companion; which

hee tooke for a great favour. Ric. Iohnson in his voyage to the Samoyeds Country, beyond the river Obb, also informeth us, of their strange iugglings, miraculous incantetions, and devillish sacrifices of deare and certaine fowles, which they were most unwilling to let him see; telling him that the being present at their clamorous sacrifices, would be dangerous. And (if my memory fail me not) as I remember I have read of a voyage into the North of Greenland, where the English found some of the savage Inhabitants sacrificing at a fire, which they would not goe into, neither come neere the smoke; but would have had the

English have come neer, which they shunned fearing danger, until at last the fire was put out. Also most strange are those sacrifices, of the sunne; which Fer. Magaglianes mentioneth, he saw performed by some old Beldames at the Iland of Mathan, not farre from Zubut, which is about 50 leagues from Cattaghan. Neither come behind, for monstrous and cruell Impiety, those ancient sacrifices of the Peruvians and Mexicans in the West-India's, who consumed many thousands of men yeerely to their Vitziliputzli, and thought to prohibit the enterance of the Spaniards by these inhumane butcheries.
         Also we must advise our travellour,

not to be over-inquisitive into the secrets of other Countries, especially, of Religion; and commerce; because often such have been taken for spies, as appeareth in the history of Iohn Newbery and his Companions at Ormus and Goa recorded by Io. Huighen Van Linshoten of Harleim; and of Antony March; who (although his priviledges seemed to allow thereof) travailing into the Samoyeds Country and having dispended in furres 1000 rables or markes Sterling, was not only delivered of his warm and pretious burthen, but threatened and fined; and his Russe servant Bodan, whipped upon the Pudkey and imprisoned. This

is also the reason that all those Eastern nations of Russia, Cathaia, Tartaria China suffer few forraigners to goe back for their Countries, being once admitted; least they should informe of their manner and quality of government. But especially the Chinois or as they name themselves the Tamegnies, are herein most scrupulous. Thirdly we must avoide to much nicety in observation, lest that by mingling confused notions together, we loose our times of studying; and so often a Travellour beginneth to think himselfe a Doctor; before he rightly be accompted a Disciple. but especially the first consideration of fidelity towards

ones proper Country is to be regarded. For unto this one thing, as to the sole end and Termination, ought all our politicall intentions and actions to be reduced; to wit, that we may profit & benefit our Country. Neither can there be almost any deed so ingratefull or hainous which doth exceede the treachery intended against a mans Country. Because this, as a publique parent doth require a higher measure of duty, then either respect of father or mother; children, wife, or Kinsemen: by how much more publique happinesses, and permanencies doth prevaile with all good minds, more then private affaires. Miserable (therefore)

and most execrable therefore is that impiety, and ingratitude which in forraigne or Transmarine regions doth endeavour to disturbe the peace and commodities of a mans proper Countrey, wherin it pleased God to give him being and education For this vice of prodition sheweth the will, and not the necessity (which here hath no place at all.) And certainely in this kind there are no clearer examples of unnaturall and ignoble perfidy then in that history which the L. Bishop G. Carleton hath entitled a thankefull remembrance of Gods mercy; which conteineth the homebred and forraigne treasons of

the English and others intended against the sacred persons of Queene Elizabeth, and K. Iames. Yet may not forthwith this odious title of a conspirator or Boutefeaux be imposed upon every one; which in forraigne parts moveth himselfe something more then ordinary in appearance against the moderne proceedings of his Country. For (as it seemeth to me) these three causes, may excuse an active man moving against the affaires exteriour of his owne nation, without admittance of the former odious title. The first exception is, if that a man travell into transmarine regions, to this. end and purpose that he may by

his sufficient insinuations into forraigne affaires profit the same: and that he may restore it into a better state by exotique physick, being now mortally ill and sicke by the many distempers of ill government. The truth of which canon may bee approved by the examples, and practises of divers famous, and worthy men: As of Themistocles, which fled rather then travelled into Persia and insinuated himselfe into the fauour of the King by professing himselfe an enemy to his owne nation: and by this meanes as also by repressing or moderating the powers of Tissaphernes, did more good to his friends at Athens; then when

he compelled Xerxes to fly through the Hellespont in a single pinnace. So Cyrus the Persian monarch receaved into his power, the city of Babylon betraied unto him by his Subject Araspis, which fled thither for prostituting the wife of Abradates: or rather as others report, so Darius the sonne of Hystaspis triumphed over the afore mentioned city, by the helpe of his faithfull servant Zopyrus, as Trogus in the end of his first booke informeth Vs. In this manner did Tarquinius sextus yeeld up unto his father the Citie of Gabium, having gotten credit from his enemies by

betraying some counsels of the Romans; and by mutilating or wounding himselfe; reporting it to be the cruell deed of his tyrannicall father. So Hanniball flying from the destruction of his Countrey, unto Antiochus the Indian monarch, under pretence of Counsell, did more good to his afflicted Countreymen at Carthage, then to either Rome or Zusa. So Alcibiades although banished by his Citizens, and flying to Lacedemon, opened certaine passages of state against his Country, yet by acquaintance with the wife of Agis their titular King, and by signifying their preparations, did expell a depending misry from his Athenians.

So Phocyon, Aristides, Demosthenes, Tullius, Seneca, and many others ancient and moderne, although some were banished and some travelled voluntarily out of their Countrey, yet either with their persons, or counsells they were never wanting to their friends.
         The second defence against this unhappy attribute may arise from this subsequent originall. For it seemeth not unjust that noble men debarred of their titles should enter againe or rather returne into their Countries, to claime those honors which are due unto them. Wherefore in my opinion Coriohm, and Tarquinius are not so

much to be reprehended: (neither yet Edward the fourth of England, because in armour accompanied with warlike troopes he returned into his Countrey from Burgundie,) because they came but to challenge their ancient titles; and promised amendement of their former offences. The same, (perhaps) is to be thought, of Henry surnamed Bullingbrooke which being condemned unto banishment, by Richard of Burdeaux King of England, under pretence of suing his livery for the Dukedome of Lancaster, (he being banished Earle of Hereford) returned againe before his time into England and landed, under

this pretence, with armed forraigne troopes at Ravenspurg in the North. Wherefore those men are not to be thought, in my opinion, traitours to their Countrey; which returne to seek that which by the Law of nations, and nature, of right belongeth to them; neither when they are mingled with the affaires of other commonwealths, (perchance) not belonging unto them, but rather contrariwise sometimes dangerous, if so bee, by these courses, they may in future bee?? profitable to their Country, or in some measure, without manifest disadvantage unto their Country, profit themselves. The truth of which affection

appeareth in the allowed voyages of many travellours, which passed and repassed with good leave unto the East Indias. But it is especially to be observed by us; that whilst we seeke our owne profit, we invade not, the rights of other men. For if we offer at this unjustice, forthwith will, without doubt, arise amongst us ruine, sedition, and the destruction of our commonwealth; (although sometimes perhaps the author be but a meane private man; and often that mischiefe followeth, which Aristophanes remembreth in the Comedy of the Acarnanians.
         
            
               
When they come once to late, themselves they thrust
            From one place to another, then needs must,
            Whilest each will have the chiefest part, the rest
            Must quarrell: and all peace they must detest.
         
         The third defence against this vice of over much activity, or rather bound, which keepes it within the order of fidelity; yet permits a travellour to mingle Counsels, & friendly to discourse with the enemies of his Countrey; so that he avoide the vice of impious treachery, and doth endeavour to doe his Country or Countreymen good. And this course without any offence to

their citizens, tooke Themistocles, Thrasibulus, Zopyrus, Harmodius and Aristogiton, Chariton and Menalippus; Neanthes, Cycizenus and Nicomachus. Yet notwithstanding some of these by the unruly multitude had before bin banished unjustly from their Country and grieveously mulcted against all equity. Thus by the Athenians, Phocyon, Aristides, and Themistocles, yea and that famous Historian Thucidides, although derived from the blood of Kings, without any of their proper deserts, were exiled by ostracismes. Of which kind of punishing or rather unjust condemnation of just men, Aristoteles thus hath it l. 3. c. 9. of his

Politiques. These men (meaning the confused rabble) in this action had no regard to the good of their city; but by ostracismes and tumults, under pretences of consultation with the publique enemies, they punished their best Patriots. So also amongst the Romans F. Camidlus, after he had expulsed the Gallograecians or rather the Senones from the city, was sent into Exile, because as Val. sayeth, being Tribune 
             was accused to have taken 1500 pounds out of the treasury; when that money (as it was well knowne) being pillaged by the Gaules, had perished in the Combat. Much better therefore and more nobler

did the Ephori of the Lacedemonians deale with their generall Pausanias, whom (although he was certainely by his owne friend Arginnius Accused to have dealt about the change of his Countreys government with the King of Persia) they would not sudainely apprehend, untill his owne confessions, drawne on by the youth, made his treachery apparent. The history is worth the consideration; and written in a most choise and elegant latin stile by Cornelius Nepos,, in his booke of the lives of (the) most excellent generals. Valerius Maximus also may supply the like examples in his chapter offidelity.
         
            
Let therefore be alwaies conversant, before the eies of a travellour, piety towards god; and residing in his most inward affections, a faithfull, constant, and perpetuall love towards his country. For if it be necessary for every Christian man alwaies to thinke of God; and to remember his benefits with a gratefull commemoration; as also to direct our humble petitions, and prayers for the enjoyment of those blessings which every day we receave from omnipotent and sacred Majestie of heaven: much more the more fervently (if herein by any, any meane is to bee held) ought a travellour to addict himselfe unto this

holy duty; which continually undergoeth not only the difficulties and dangers common to other men, but also undertaketh sometimes a combat with dangers themselves. And to this religious feare of god, let the love of our countrey succed in the next place. For rightly saied he, which told us; that fidelity yeelded to a friend is a great ornament, (and) trust performed and duty to our parents is a greater, but to our Country stability yeelded is the greatest of all. Neither shall wee find any men of fame and honor celebrated in history, which did not flourish with an immaculate love of their Country. The truth of this

axiome may appeare in the renowned relations of Codrus, Themistocles, Timoleon, and amongst ours, of the Horatii, Fabii, Camilli, Curtii, Bruti, Ciceroues, which to their eternall honor are commended (nay almost deifyed) in fames never dying register, for their inviolate fidelity to their Country in its most sodaine and heavy dangers; which they like noble and truly renowned patriots bought out with their owne lives. For allwaies amongst generous spirits have publique affaires beene preferred before private, although sometimes those private have not a little concerned the publique also. Most Heroique (if

the politicall affaires of this life be only ballanced, is that speech of Otho the first to his most faithfull souldiers, after the foile he receaved by the Vitellianists at Bebriacum. To hazard (quoth hee) this vertue and valour of yours to needlesse dangers, I accompt it to deare a price of my life. The more hope you doe shew, ifI listed to live, the more commendation will bee of my death, as being voluntary, and not by constraint. Fortune and I have had good experience the one of the other: and nothing the lesse for that my time hath beene short. I tell you it is harder to moderate a mans selfe in felicity, which hee looketh not

long to enjoy. The civill warre first grew on Vitellius party; and thence grew the first occasion to contend with arms for the Empire; but to contend no oftner but once, I, for my part, am purposed to give the example. And hereby let posterity judge and esteeme of Otho.
         Through my benefit Vitellius shall enjoy his brother, his wife, and his children: I seeke no revenge; I have no neede of such comforts. Others have kept longer the Empire, but let it be said, that none hath ever so valiantly left it. Shall I suffer so much Roman blood again to be spilt; and the Common-wealth deprived of so worthy armies?

let this minde accompany mee my to grave, and so surely it shall, that you for your parts would have dyed for my sake: but tarry you, and live, and let not me be any longer a hinderance to your obtaining of pardon, nor you to my determination and purpose. To speake more of dying, or to use many words of that argument, I take to proceede of a cowardly courage. This take for a principall part of my resolutenesse, that I complaine not of any. For to blame Gods or men is their property, which gladly would live. This was he which exceeded Cato himselfe. For Cato dyed rather out of difdaine

and a sullen humour; because he would not behold after his victory, a pretended tyrant, his enemy, but this noble Emperour rather then he would engage his countrymen in a bloody quarrell, chose to end his dayes on the point of a rapier. Not unlike was that Christian, and truly worthy resolution of Capt. Nicholas Downton in his 7. East India voyage where (after the retort of the Portugall Bravado) he concludeth his Iournie, and combat, with this admirable resolution. After all these insultations (quoth hee) I was glad to see the Viceroy give over the hopes of his fortunes, by further following of us, which course I

like very well, since he is so patient; for there is nothing under his foot which can make amends for the losse of the worst mans finger I have. Besides, I wish no occasion to fight for that, which I have already paied for, I am already possessed on: and I am so farre from the humour to fight for honor, unlesse for the honor of my King and Country, that I would rather save the life or lives of one of my poorest Pur: pilg: Pur. I. l. 4. c. II. p. 514. people, then kill a thousand enemies. Great and noble also was the care of Charles the fifth King of Spaine, and Emperour of Germany at that unhappy siege of Algier

wherein he himselfe in person was present, when many of his gallies and ships of burthen being lost by a horrible Tempest, he commanded a great multitude of excellent coursers to be cast overboord; reputing it (as sayeth my author) Knols Tur. Histo. 724. Vit. Solim: an unmercifull part, to preferre the safeguard of those horses, although they were of great worth, before the life of the basest common souldier or horse-boy in his campe. And therefore (in my poore opinion) not without Cause Sir Arthur Gorges in his martiall and marine observations of the Portugall voyage taxeth Sir Richard Greenvile, Viceadmirall unto the

Lord Thomas Howard in a voyage unto the Azores or Flemming Islands, who being chased by a great armada of huge Spanish Galleons, followed not the directions and judicious courses of his Admirall; but suffered himselfe to be inclosed, and his sailes becalmed by those massy shipps, and at length to be taken; his shippe being sunke, called the Revenge, and neare two hundred slaine outright. But more ridiculous (as also more vainly cruel) was the practice of Mathias de Alburkerke an East-India Captaine, who beeing by the King of Portugall appointed Governour of Goa, and fearing at his returne to be dismissed of his

office, caused his ship to stay out eighteen months at sea, in which voyage for one mans pride and vanity 250 men perished. This was he which grew (after he receaved his Commission) to that height of vanity that he caused fortune to be pictured in his Cabine, himselfe with a threatning countenance standing by her, and holding up a staffe with this impreza: Quaero quae vincas, i. e. I will have thee to overcome. The juditious Travailour, from these examples may perceave that noble natures preferre the publique affaires of their Country before private negotiations: and therefore in my judgment that saying of 10. Basilius

or Ivan Vasilinich recorded in his answer to the excuse of Mr. Anth. Ienkenson, is well worth the noting. Ienkenson had beene commanded by the Emperour, at his first returne into England, to impart and negotiate some affaires concerning the estate of both Kingdoms, England & Russia, to the ever glorious Princesse, Queene Elizabeth. He seeming to have neglected this command the Emperour tooke him up, with this Apothegme. We have since thy last departure given audience unto one Thomas Randolph, but all his talke was with us about merchants affaires. We know that merchants matters are to be

heard: for they are the stay of our Princely Treasures: but first Princes affaires are to be established, and then merchants. Many more ludicious sentences of this nature may be read with Mr. Ienkensons Polite oration in the 1. To. of Mr. Hacluits voyages p. 405. Let therefore a Travellour so much honour, and entirely respect the benefit of his Countrey, that unto this, the love and duty he oweth unto his parents, the next under God, may be subjected. To this tye among good men even the love of brothers hath given place. Thus Timophanes affecting tyranny, not without praise, lyeth stab'd dead by the just hand of his owne brother

Timoleon an act, without the ayde: of this truth, blotted with the odious attribute of parricide.
         Thus that noble freer of his country I. Brutus, for the safety of his most Libertatem quam majores peperere dign?? studeat fovere posteritas. Sicl. deare mother commanded his owne aspiring sons to be whipped to death, after the, ancient custome of the Romans. And why should we be ambitious to heape up example? since Curtius to stop an infectious plague amongst his Countrymen, leaped into the ground alive since Genucius Cipus went into a voluntary banishment with his family, because

the south-sayers, had declared his sonne should be a king, because he was borne, with some small extuberancies in his forehead: since Decius, the Army of the Roman breaking order confusedly vowed himselfe a sacrifice; since Scipio compelled the reliques Brutus Potius quam patri amoris vim ex animo eiceret; liberos proprios seri feriri elegit. of that bloody battell of Canna to sweare their service unto their Country as long as any of them should remaine alive; since Codrus the King of the Athenians, by a stratageme drew on his owne death, that he might fulfill, the Oracle, and save his army. I could heape innumerable examples;

unlesse it were imprinted in every mans mind, that hath any dram of honesty; or vertue; even by the lawes of nature; That all mens affections unto their Countrey, are to be preferred before all other bondes, and obligations whatsoever. Wherefore Horatium Coclitem contra omnes hostium copias tennit in ponte solu?? sine ulla spe salutis patria salus. Vt Cllia virgo, ita omnes suo casu aut confirmare patria salutem aut morari periculum debent bist T. C. hapo 534. he that in forraigne and strange nations doth invent or endeavour any snares or deceipts against his country, or Countreymen; doth not only shew himselfe to be a most ungratefull, and wicked man; but one which is banished by his owne Confession

and iudgement. Neither commonly doth any forraigne nation; regard those which presume to betray their owne Countrey. A most excellently just, but more terrible execution have wee of this truth (that I may passe over to many examples) performed by the magnificent Emperour Solyman upon a perfidious traitor of this Kind. Nicholas Keretschen a German, held Giula a city in Hungaria against Parthaw Bassa, generall of the Otthoman forces there. After many encounters and assaults, the Bassa still had the worst untill he left of his Iron, and began to batter with

golden engines. These no sooner set on worke by Georgius Bebicus Kinseman to the Governor; but they made an impression, and forthwith like a deepe wellfilled mine presently blew up the Governours faith.
         
            Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
            Aurisacra fames?
            Mens brests & minds gold can derive
            And corrupt most men now alive.
         
         Shortly therefore after this comprimise he delivereth the city, covenanting besides his reward, that the souldiers should with bagge, and baggage safely depart; all which, sayth mine author, Knols; was frankely granted, who were not gon past a mile out of the Towne; but they

were set upon by the Turkes, and all slaine except some few, which crept into the reedes growing in the marish fast by and so escaped. The traitour himselfe expecting his reward, was carried in bonds to Constantinople; where afterwardes upon complaint made, how hardly he had used certaine Turkes, whom he had sometimes taken prisoners, he was by the command of Selimus who succeeded Solyman, (not of Solyman himselfe as others say) thrust into a hogshead struck full of nailes with the point inward, with this inscription upon it. Heare receave the reward of thy avarice, and treason. Giula thou soldest for gold: if thou

bee not faithfull to Maximilian thy Lord, neither wilt thou be to mee. And so the hogshead closed fast upp; he was rowled up and down, untill he therin miserably dyed. Nay the very Barbarians and Salvages doe hate this most unworthy perfidiousnesse. For
         
            Nome?? amicitiae barbara corda movet.
            The name of true fidelity
            Doth touch the heart of cruelty.
         
         Not long since there lived a salvage Weroance or petty Prince in Virginia, a continent of the Nor. America; named Powhatan. To this Barbarian two Duchmen belonging to the english plantation, under the government, at that time, of Cap. Iohn Smith, a worthy and valiant gentleman,

the first commander, and discoverer, fled away: pretending hard usage, and discovering the secrets of the fortification. These base unworthy traitours two Gentlemen, one Mr. Wiffin; and Ieffrey Abbot were sent to dispatch: which when Wiffin would have done, he was resisted by his companion. Therefore they returned backe without due punishment of these fugitives. Which Powhatan perceiving (although they had promised him to doe great matters for him, with the next governour the Lo. La Ware, then upon the sea;) he commanded his men to beat out their Braines telling them, as you would have betrayed

Capt. Smith to me so will you me to this Lord. Thus can the divine Iustice amongst the very barbarous, find due chastifement for infidelity. Raro antecedentem scelestum Deseruit peds poena clado.
         
         To this consideration of fidelity, a discreet travellour ought to adjoine the next of Temperance: which like the very soule of the soule, consists of 3 parts. For there is a temperance of our aliment or dyet: a temperance of sensuall pleasures; which is properly called continence; and lastly a temperance in our speech which is called, a discreet taciturnity.
         
            
The first part of which vertue is most exactly to be observed by a travellor into forraigne regions. For what can be more dangerous then for a stranger to devoure strange, and unknowne meates: perhaps although delitious yet in their owne natures poisonous. Such are the most beautifull apples growing neere Ierico (of which W. Lithgow) that are in colour and tast most beautifull and gustfull; and yet in operation most venimous: as also are those apples which were found in Guiana by Capt. Vnton Fisher, a little of whose juice causeth sleepe unto death. Such are those dangerous Druggs of Petum amongst the Brasilians, Opium

amongst the Turkes, Areca and Betelee amongst the Malapars, Cassany rootes amongst the Americans in generall, which are most dangerous to forraigners, and have caused the death of many thousand stout men, which have rather trusted the delight of the palate, then the direction of temperance: nay the very lovely sweet Durgoens (being the glory and delight of the East Indias) is found to be most dangerous, if taken in to great quantity, rusting a knife, and eating Iron like aqua fortis: and are there no lesse obnoxious then Melones over greedily eaten in Spain or Italy; or grapes over violently devoured in France. Many

are the inconveniences which such seeming idainties produce; being indeed as the Greekes rightly name them, , sowre-sweet to the Improvident belly god Amongst such viands use the Italian proverbe related by Cornarus; that which is left, profiteth more then that which is eaten. Let temperance therefore be thy preparative, and sometime evacuation by Phlebotomy in hot; by bathe stoves in cold countries. but especially avoid Voracity and a greedy desire to be devouring; because such customes doe disgrace, not only thy own manners; but call into question also the Customes of thy Nation. Besides, this vice

bringeth upon thee all sort of diseases, since there is nothing so miserable expensive as a glutton, which eateth that he may surfet; and surfetteth that he may eate. The proofe of this saying is most evident, from the deadly and infectious events of the voyage to Puerto rico; and Portugall; as also the first voyage, to Guinea and Benin where many thousands of lusty men suddenly perished for want of this golden vertue of temperance. Also there is nothing more exactly observed in a forraigner then the outward gesture of his clothing, feeding, and gesture, from which signes strangers make a Iudgement of his education. But of this most exquisite

and rare vertue especially amongst young men; wee have spoken somewhat before, that may be (if well disgested) a sop for Cerberus.
         2. Of the temperance of language also in the former caution enough hath beene spoken.
         3 Wherefore now some brief direction concerning sensuall recreations and pleasures shall in order be added. Of these amongst forraigners great care must be taken. For if this Violence, or rather furious rage of the most unbridled passion, which tempteth mankind, be exceeding dangerous, covered with the best stratagems of this wicked art, (in which P. Ovidius

and Io. Bocatius have to their owne disgrace, if not ruine, approved themselves masters) to those which remaine fixed in the same place of habitation: what shall we conceive of the great inconveniences, it bringeth forth, when we lye open to all forraign snares and temptations? besides, (which would be marked) Crimes creepe, nay suddainely rush and upon those which are secure: and to easily doe strange vices overcome those which are already worryed with domestique and home-bred passions. The force also of custome doth tickle an Intemperate man; whilst he thinketh it a part of great wisedome

to collect those things, and to practise them, which although (perhaps) rare, yet certainely are most vitious.
         And can there be a greater misery then for a man which in his own country was accounted to be wel and honestly educated, being intoxicated with the study of novelties; to become in another climate, the very fosse, and sinke of all those vices, which either vanity hath invented, or luxury found out? Against these most pernitious foments of vice, there is no better antidote, then temperance; which also doth most prevalently resist, when the vice of incontinency doth but begin; and is of most power

when as yet, (in Ciceroes phrase) the Ramme of the enemy hath not shaken the wall: for as the Satyrist hath it:
         
            In vaine then for terse hellebore wee cry,
            VVhen that wee are compel'd almost to die
            With heavy swellings, hee that will have ease,
            Must at the first prevent or cure disease.
         
         For as a City which is well fortified is not subject to sodaine Invasions; neither doth a Castle well munited with Ordinance and Bulwarks much feare Panique terrours: so a

minde inabled with the munition of fortitude most easily resisteth the enticements of vices; neither is sodainly conquered with the machinations of impietie.
         For, an enemy which is armed with the darts of fortitude, doth not presently yeeld, besides it is the nature of Vice to creepe on by degrees, neither to fight at their first appearances, but rather to seeke ambuscadoes, working their feates rather by the helpe of deceipt, then prowesse. It is the saying of the Poet.
         
            None on a sudden growes most vicious. Vice
            
               
Comes on by stealth, and slilie doth entice.
         
         So mischiefes often trye by faire meanes, rather then by open force to assaile those, they would subject; and rather seeke oportunity to deceive, then a just warre. And like as heretofore many ancient Chieftaines did use to terrifie, by some strange stratagems and sudden devices, their enemies; thinking it more safe to fright, them with panique feares then with Armes: So vice, whilst it artificially doth frame a combat, it placeth Intemperance perdue, as it were in the field, or sends this Monster as a spy into the little Isle of man; which by ill customes and enticements,

may draw him into Voracitie, Gluttony and Incontinencie: which sprigs of Vices, like the darke pathes of errours, deceive and draw many men into most dangerous precipices; otherwise the most dissolute persons would abhor to act those things, which are undecent; if they were not newly varnished with some aduleerate commixtions. Let Temperance therefore be as a watchtower or lanthorne unto a Travellour; by whose bright rayes, not clouded with the dark fumes of luxury, he may rightly steere his reason in this Sea of Adversities, and so may preserve his discretion untainted from any immodest word or deed.
         
            
The second generall observation is referred to inquisition or enquiry, to wit, the enquiry of the Common-wealth, in which thou art conversant after the common romances & conceipts of the vulgar. Then such inquisition (except it be very moderate and discreet) there is nothing more vaine, unprofitable or empty. For certainly it is a most vaine and frivolous thing to enquire about every sleight rumour, which is set abroach by the common people, and to discourse of other mens affaires, as of our own; Since such men rather amongst the learned, deserve the opinion of vaine curiosity, then learned Science.

This vice is by Caesar in his Commentaries and Nico Flisclinus in his Iulius Redivivus, Act. 2. Scen. 4. attributed to the barbarous Celtes or Gaules.
         These men (quoth my Author) have a very barbarous and rude custome; for assoone as they see forreigne Merchants, they compasse them round in the streetes, and enquire most nicely of the state of those Forraigners from whence they come. The Merchants being compelled by their importunities to answer unknown or unfitting questions, many times invent such tales as may please them best, and seeme most credible; Which they hearing, forthwith they set upon

their consultations, and according to these relations dispose of their affaires; then the which there cannot be devised a more rash and inconsiderate folly. There are no people more miserable therefore then such men, which suffer their eares to be perpetually filled with such newes; (which suppose they are strained upon the racke, if one day bee spent quietly and studiously.) Hence it is that such men, for the most part are perpetually subject to exorbitant passions, unquiet motions, and sudden feares; for being filled with choller and melancholy, through the overmuch agilitie of their apprehensions, and the uncertainty of their resolutions,

they continually have those galleries of reason, their heads stusted with the undigested and crude rumours, which they so much affect and hunt after. Of these Lucretius:
         
            Some men inconstant in each City, feare
            The houses, lest in pieces they should teare
            Their limbes with falling: others least the ground
            Should gaping open and enclose thent round
            These panique terrors tell some that the earth
            Will now dissolve, and have another birth,
            And opening her estie jawes, will fall
            Into a Chaos and thus ruine all.
         
         
            
Let this be therefore a caution to be observed by a Travellour, not to take newes upon trust, concerning strange Common-wealthes: because hardly such an inquisitor can obtain any remarkeable knowledges, and yet is most subiect to be ensnared by promoters. Rather let choise and silent narrations (although fewer in number, and perchance not seeming to every companion so plausible, be his ayme,) such are the observations of Antiquities, AEdifices, Libraries; the exscriptions of the places of battels, and the changes of the governments of cities. In this path let moderation be also his guide: that if he happen to strike upon

some difficult passages, he may retract his footsteps, before he be to farregone.
         The third observation is more generall; to wit, that a travellour ought with his vigorous and festive carriage, to conjoine magnificence according to his ability. For a poore, and ill accoutred travellor is the most ignoble creature in the Nil habit infaelix pauper tas durius in se, quam quod rediculos homines facit. world. All men in a manner, (such are these later times) are esteemed from their outward comportment; but especially travellours. To this magnificencie, let there be added a manly reservation, for some men attributing all their best

gestures to a kind of easinesse or (rather parasitisme) and dedicacating, whatsoever they can get from others or exhaust from their owne, to vaine ostentation, doe faile in the especiall parts of splendor, same and reputation. From this precipice we must beware, least that wee yeeld to much to exteriour pompe, and little or nothing to discreet mediocrity. For when once our familiar affaires, and the opinion of our credits are subjected to wast; it is scarse credible, how soone these buildings of our estates and fortunes decay. And therefore most wittily doth the Comaedian Plautus induce the young Cavaler?? Philolaches in the

first Act. 2. Scene of his Com: Mostellaria, comparing himselfe unto a Carpenter, and his estate unto a new building which unlesse it be perpetually repaired, and often new furbished;
         
            Venit imber, lavit parietes, perpluunt
            Tigna, putrefacit aer operam fabri:
            Nequior jam factus est usus oedium.
            A tempest comes, the wals are wash'd, and all
            The strongest rafters soone begin to fall,
            Corrupted with the foggie aire; and streight
            The house decaying falls by its owne weight.
         
         And no wonder is this sudden mutation (quoth Lucretius:) because.
         
            
               
The houses in the streets doe often shake,
            And mov'd by ratling Carres doe trembling quake.
         
         Let magnificence therefore bee moderately mixed with this manly discretion: lest that wee overmuch contract the goods we have by the divine providence allotted unto us: or (without the just care of a discreet steward) suffer them over-nimbly and fluidly to slip from us.
         The fourth observation of a Travellour should be the study of the best things. For many there are which seeke forraigne Countries to no other end indeed, but to satisfie their sensuall pleasures. But Trismegistus, Apollonius,

Mercurius, and Pythagoras, the antient quaternio of travellours and wise men, to this end only did leave the sweet ayre of their Countreys, that they might returne enriched, with the generall magazine of knowledge.
         Neither travelled these Worthies that they might only behold the outward shapes, countenances, and appearances of men; but that they might understand their Manners, customes, languages, learning; and that they might be capable of those grounds and foundations, which may prove Canons and Theoremes of future Sciences. Let therefore a travellour heare of nofamous Polititian, or learned

Scholler, but let him endeavour (if he may) to bee his Visitant, and rather let him study to see such a miracle of science; then the lofty buildings of the most aspiring Cities; that he may understand from this Oracle of the Muses those things, which may both delight and instruct him. Thus many learned judicious travellours (even from the rising of the Patron of the Muses) came to Rome or Padua, to visit T Livius, the most exquisite builder of all prophane Histories. Thus as yet is Cor. Tacitus honoured in most moderne languages: and amongst the starres of this latter age Erasmus, Vives, Polidorus, Muretus, Lipsius, Gruterus, &c. were

in their houses, schooles, studies, visited with no small (I had almost said) adoration. Let also a travellour passe by no Library of worth, (but if that opportunity may permit) without searching and observing it, committing to memory those things there which he findeth rare, and not regarding those sleight vanities, which the Market or Tavernes may afford. These judicious speculations also being referred to this one and onely end, that at his returne he may excell in the Knowledge of the best things.
         To this let there be added, a constant resolution. In all businesse whatsoever we undertake the chiefe ornament and advancement

is constancy: especially in those things, which take force from our resolutions. In this purpose of travel (if we may beleve Iudicious Lipsius) there is need of a twofold caution, that our intent be well founded; and then that it be co??stant. For a mind that is mutable, gathers not the juice of erudition. Because it imploieth the times of discipline to please extravagant passions. Discreet frugality is an excellent remedy against these. But frugality it self is a most vain & idle name, yea often the cover of wretchednes and penury, unlesse judicious moderation may be the director of our expences. Then indeed our manner of living truly shineth, &

strengthened with the glory of reason, groweth famous. Avoid also the distraction of businesse, which often hindereth the intents of a travellour.
         For a iudicious man undertaketh not his peregrination, to be pragmaticall after the manner of lawyers, but when his leasure serveth him, that he may observe by action; because he often, which is to busy in the practique part, can hardly learne any thing, whilst he doth spend his time in superficiall follies, or needlesse businesse, and so both loseth science, and experience. Then which, what is more ridiculous? For the age of man being distinguished, and separated into proper

seasons, hath unto them opposed severall faculties. And youth (for in our childish yeares some men prohibit us to travell) seemeth to be the middle centre of Practise and Theorie. Let therefore time be so allotted, and distributed unto thy businesse, that thou mayst not bee inforced to neglect the due seasons of meditation. At all, and in all ages it is most convenient to meditate; Neither is there any degree in the world that may not be adorned, and advanced by learning.
         To this part adde the moderation of thy gesture and behaviour; for as speech is the Index of the minde: so is gesture a declaration of thy naturall inclinations.

So Ambrose is reported to have refused the service of two Deacons in the Church, being offended with the levitie of their behaviour; besides, nothing is so mutable as gesture, or more obnoxious to censure in Forraigne parts; whose opinions, who often lightly doth contemne, is without doubt to be accounted of a Dissolute inclination.
      
   
   
      
         
         The Epilogue.
         THese are the observations, and Cautions, (most D. Brother) which especially are to be observed by those, which purpose to travell into Transmarine Regions; as for many other directions if they be not referred, to the forenamed Canons or Topique places; I have alwayes thought them, the subjects of Common use and experience.
         FINIS.
         
      
   
