<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         A TRVE AND
EXACT RELATION
OF THE
Proceedings and Victorious
Successe of the Ships in the Service
of the King and Parliament, which
were sent for the Reliefe of
IRELAND,
Under the
Command of Captaine Swanley, Admirall: In
the taking divers ships in Milford Haven.
         AS ALSO
Their Valorous undertakings (& the wonderfull
blessing of God upon them) in the Principality
of Wales, in taking divers Castles, Commanders,
Ammunition, Souldiers, and in
the totall subduing of the County
of PEMBROKE.
         Writen by Captain William Smith, Vice-admirall
in the same Voyage.
         Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1644.
      
   
   
      
         
         
         
            A
True and Exact Relation of
the proceedings and Victorious successe
of the Ships in the service of the
King and Parliament, which were
sent for the Reliefe of
IRELAND.
            IN the Proceed of the Fleet on our Irish voyage,
you may bee pleased to take notice that on the
18. January, 1643. wee set sayle in Plymouth
Sound, and aftermuch foule weather and contrary
windes beating about the Lands end; it
pleased God, to bring part of the Fleet safe to
Anchor in Milford Haven on the 23 of the same,
viz. The Leopard Regis, the Swallow; the Leopard
Merchant, Providence Merchant, and Cressent Frygot, and
within three dayes after, the Prosperous, and the two Lerpoole vessels,
came into Milford; But through the neglect of Captaine Plunket,
and Captain Williams, the said Vessels were necessitated to remain
at Milford seven weekes, it being their charge to have conveyed
them to their desired Port; And at our arrivall wee found at Anchor
in the Haven, the Globe of Bristoll, and a small ship which
arrived at Milford, eight dayes before wee came in; And had
brought from Bristoll, Ammunition to fortifie the Harbor; as great
Guns, Powder, Bullet and other provisions, and had Landed them
at Prickspill, which lyeth on the Northside of the Harbor, where

the enemy had made a Fort, and fortified it; Into which Pyll; the Globe
and the other ship having made us from the mouth of the Harbor,
let slip and runne; And my Admirall in pursuit came before the
Pyll; where were exchanged diverse shots, but no hurt done on either
side; The Admirall perceiving no considerable service or execution
could bee performed on the Fort or Ships; they being
drawn about a Neck of Land behind the Fort; hee came to Anchor
before it within shot; and the Swallow a head of him; and
the rest of the Fleet a head of the Swallow, inclining to the Southside:
some three dayes after in the night, the enemy drew a Gunne
out of the Fort to the Westward of the Pyll, and at break of the
day, began a morning salute to the Swallow, who to gratifie their
courtesie, answered them; and after many shot their Gunne split,
and so they drew it away at that time: it proved very stormy weather,
insomuch that our Ships hauld home their Anchors, wherefore
upon the first opportunity the Leopard and Swallow were inforced
to weigh and come to Anchor, on the South side, before Angle
A birth, where usually the Kings Ships ride when they come into
that Harbour, but shortly after the Admirall sent the Prosperous and
Leopard Merchant, to ride before the Pyll, to hinder, if it were possible,
the strengthning of their Work; which daily the enemy assayed
to doe; from the Ships were diverse shots made daily at their
works; as also from the Fort at the Ships; but as yet no considerable
dammage received, onely the Leopard Merchant, received a
shot in her quarter, which dropt into the Masters bed: and to annoy
the Fort the more, the Admirall, with the joynt consent of the
Commanders, built a Fort on the South side over against the Pyll,
and placed therein a Demy-Cannon; wherewith wee played into
their workes, which was a great incouragement unto many in the
County, to adhere unto the well-affected party, who at that time
were very weak. Thus having presented you with our proceedings
at Sea, in and about the Harbour; you may bee pleased to take a
view of the correspondence wee held a shore, both with the ill and
well affected after our happy arrivall; I call it happy in respect of
the great deliverance it pleased the most mighty Preserver of all
things to afford to the distressed Inhabitants of Pembroke, and the
well-affected Gentlemen of that County.
            The next morning after we came to anchor in the Haven, Colonell
Langhorn and the Major of Pembrooke came aboord the Leopard,
and informed my Admirall with the feeble condition the well-affected

party was in; As also of the strength, power, and insolency
of the adverse party: For after the enemy had fortified the North
side of the Harbour, and intending to have fortified the South side
within a day or two, had not our arrivall frustrated that designe,
the enemy presuming on their strength, cast off their sheeps-cloathiug,
in which they had so long deluded the people, and demonstrated
themselves to be like unto the rest of there Confederates (Ravening-Wolves.)
The Earle of Carbury having voted, that after the
Harbour was Fortified, he would plunder the Town of Pembrook,
and the houses of the Gentlemen who had adhered to that party,
and that their persons should be put to death by cruell tortures;
The Major of Pembrooke they sayd should be put in a Barrell of
nayles and brought to Prickspill, and from the top of a hill should
be rouled down into the sea: This report so terrified the Gentlemen,
that they fled from their houses, and hid themselves in obscure
places in disguise, and sent their wives and children to Tynby,
where his Lordship then lay; humbly to supplicate his Lordship
to be pleased to grant them protection, that their houses might
not be plundered, nor their persons abused by the rude souldiers;
among whom there was a reverend aged Gentlewoman, the wife
of one Master Griffeth White, who had in her house eight sonnes
and eight daughters who were Virgins, and foure small Grandchildren,
in all number twenty, with divers servants both Male
and Female. This Gentlewoman pressing his Lordship to commiserate
her sad estate, in case her house should be plundered,
desired his protection; assuring his Lordship that whensoever hee
would be pleased to give her husband leave to wait on him, shee
did not not doubt but that her husband would give his Lordship
ample satisfaction in all his lawfull demands. His Lordship replyed,
he would finde a time to speak with her husband, but as
for a protection he would grant her none. The Gentlewoman with
tears in her eyes desired his Lordship to looke on her children, who
in point of honor he stood engaged to protect: as also the chashity
of Mations and Virgins, the which without his Lordships
protection she sayd, must undoubtedly be violated, and her family
perish. To which his Lordship answered with divers reproaches,
and some jeas among, that it were better her children and family
should perish, than that the King should want means to perfect his
designe; to which she said, the King could not want, if his Majesty
would be graciously pleased to be content with what God, and the

Lawes of the Land hath provided; At which his Lordship flung
out of the roome, leaving the Gentlewoman with tears in her eyes,
and so she departed to her house full of grief and pensive thoughts.
A passage from his Lordship of so barbarous a deportment, that I
beleeve history can scarse parallel to have proceeded from any heathen.
And if these be the loyall subjects who fight for the Gospel,
the Kings honor, and the Subjects Liberty, I leave to every mans
judgement to determine. The lamentable condition of the well-affected,
being by the Admirall and Commanders disputed, It was
demanded of Colonell Langhorn and the Major, what force the welaffected
party was able to rayse to oppose his Lordship; It was by
them replyed, that they could not raise above 40 horse, and about
60 foot: then it was demanded, in case there should be 200 seamen
landed well armed, whether they would joyn with them, in
endeavouring to drive his Lordship out of the County, for unlesse
they would be active, they must resolve to prepare to go away with
the Fleet, in regard a consumption of victuals would force us to depart
that Harbour. The Colonel and Major, with the wel-affected
Gentry, like gallant men who had rather die than outlive the honor
of their Country, or see the ruine thereof by a Jesuiticall and popish
faction, resolved to put themselves under the providence of the
Almighty, and with the help of our Sea-men to affront the enemy;
the which was without delay put in execution. And on the 13 of
Feb. we fell on a Garrison of the enemies in a strong hould called
(Stackepoole) the Mannor house of one Mr. Roger Lort, on which with
our great guns having made a breach, after 8 hours assault we tooke
it with the losse of two men, and many wounded on both sides;
shortly after they fell on another garrison of the enemy called Treffne
lying within a mile of Tynbye, out of which Town his Lordship
issued, with about 200 horse and soot, intending to have relieved
Treffyne, and faced our forces, on whom we let fly a peece of
Ordnance, whereat his Lordship wheeled about with all his forces
and ran into the Town. Our forces prosecuting their assault upon
the Garrison, took it, and therein 45 horse, and 150 Arms, with the
losse of two men on our side, and six on the enemies: God giving
our small forces this good successe, they retired to Pembrooke to reliesh
their men, and to enable themselves for a more potent design on
the enemy, intending to oppose their whole body, which consisted
of 1200 men foot and horse, which lay in and about Haverfordwest,
then his Lordships Rendevouz; but his Lordship hearing of this

design, having fortified Haverford West, and placed most of his
strength there, his Lordship like a valiant Commander, with 20.
horse, some foot, and four field-pieces ran away, telling the rest
of the Commanders, that he rode unto the adjacent County to
raise more forces, and that he would suddenly returne.
            Now when our men were refreshed, and six fild-pieces mounted
on Carriages with Wagons to convey their Ammunition
and Victuals, they resolved to fall on the Fort at the Pyll: and
on the 22. of Feb. Collonel Langhorne & the Mayor of Pembrook,
sent aboard the Admirall, to desire that our boates might bee
sent to the passage to convey over on the enemies side, their
Artillery, Wagons and Provisions; the which was done on
Friday the 23. And about three of the clock in the morning
they were all landed, consting of about 300. horse and foot,
with six field pieces of Ordnance; who proceeding on their
March, their horse in the Front, they advanced before the
Pyll, about twelve of the clocke at noone; Our Ships also were
at Anchor before the Fort; the Leopard Regis, and the Swallow
road to the Westward, and the Prosperous and Leopard
Merchant road to the Eastward, plying our Ordnance into
the Fort; And when our Land Forces had drawne up their
Artillery, they played into the Fort from a hill which lay to
the Eastward of it, and were answered againe; the horse and
foot did skirmish from their Ambuscadoes; but on this day
no man was either slaine or hurt on either side; Night comming
on, caused a cessation; our Land forces quartering about
their Artillery lay in the field before the Fort; it being a bitter
cold night, the next morning being Saturday the 24. by
breake of the day, from our Ships and Land-forces, we began
to ply our Ordnance; from the Swallow was a shot made into
the Fort, which tooke off the head of one man, and the Posteriours
of another, of which he dyed the next day; Our horse
and foot behaved themselves valiantly that day, and beat the
Enemy from their Ambuscadoes; and with the Enemy entred
their Fort, and then the enemy cryed quarter; the which
our Commanders in imitation of their Heavenly Father,
who is the God of mercy, granted farre above their deserts,
and spared their lives; who had formerly voted, that if they
should prove Conquerers, they would kill the dogges, & ravish

the Bitches, and drowne the Whelps; most in humane language,
did it not proceed from those that adhere to the Beast,
and therefore proper for them to speake Diabolicall and
Beasticall language; In the Fort were taken Armes 200. Pleces
of Ordnance 18. Souldiers 240 & Commanders 26. their
names and qualities are expressed in the Schedule annexed; In
the Pyll were taken two ships, the Globe of Bristoll, in her twelve
pieces of Ordnance; and by a shot from the Globe was one of
the Swallowes men slaine on the shoare by his owne folly, the
other Ship called the Providence had belonging to her ten great
Guns, but the enemy had carried them to Haverford West, in
the taking of this Fort, the protecting power of the Almighty,
I hope, by us shal never be forgorte??, for it was his own
arme that got the victory, to whom be ascribed all honour and
glory for ever and ever; for in taking thereof, there was not
one man slain, either by sword or small shot; when the enemy
was routed, some of their souldiers fled to Haverford West, and
informed the Commanders there, of the losse of the Fort, and
that all their Commanders and Souldiers therein were taken
prisoners; At which newes it is reported, Sir Henry Vaughan
with the of his Commanders, began to rage & sweare like mad
men and as Beare robbed of her whelps, ran up and down the
streets, crying, beat up our Drums; gather our horse and foot together,
for we will out this night, & be revenged of the Roundheaded
Paliament dogs; And having with this bravado drawn
their forces into a Body, being about 450. Sir John Stepney the
Governour of that town, like a prudent overseer, went into the
Church-yard, to see if he could discern our forces to approach
towards Haverford West, about halfe a mile from the towne, hee
discovered a heard of black-bullocks coming toward him; hose
horned beasts so amazed the Knight, that being afraid of his
own shadow, his worship ran to the head of their forces, & swor
Gods-wounds the Round-headed dogs were comming; at
which report they marched out of the town, & calling to mind
the valiant example of their L. Generall Carbury, they wheeled
about, and ran away, the boyes of the towne perceiving them
to run, fell on the reare, and took from them threescore Muskets;
this disorder in the reare made those in the front beleeve
that the Round-heads were at their heels indeed.
            
               
The feare thereof metamorphosed aule our Cozen Taffies into
Mercuries, and winged speed, every man fled for his life, some
threw away their Armes, and those that had the charge of the
Powder flung it into the River. And in this manner was the
Towne of Haverfordwest surrendred; verifying that saying of
the kingly Prophet David, The wicked flyeth when no man pursueth
them. When the enemy fled, they left behinde them in Haverfordwest
a hundred red Coats which were never worne, a
quantity of victuals, and ten peeces of Ordnance, all which
argued they wanted nothing but a good Cause to maintaine.
Now our forces being againe refreshed, having our Demi-Cannon
and a Demi-Culvering mounted on field Carriages,
and being supplyed from our Ships with Powder and all other
Ammunition, they marched towards Tynbie on the 6. of March.
On the same day the Swallow and Crescent Frigot, with the
Prosperous Merchant, set saile from Milford, and came to anchor
before Tynbie, where I summoned the Governour and
Maior to surrender the Towne for the service of the King and
Parliament: but receiving a negative answer, I desired the
Governour and Maior to send out of the Towne all the women
and children; for unlesse they would comply I must in discharge
of my duty use my uttermost endeavours to force them
thereunto. The same night our Land Forces came within two
miles of the Towne, from whence Colonell Langhorne sent aboard
the Swallow, and desired me to summon the Town, the
which I had done before his Letter came, and returned the Colonell
their Answer. And receiving no satisfaction from the
Governour or Maior, the next morning about eight of the
Clocke we began to play into the Towne with our Ordnance
from our Ships; and about one a clocke in the afternoone our
Land Forces came before the Towne. And having placed
their Demi-cannon within a quarter of a mile of the Towne,
they fell to battery, and so wee continued three dayes. The
small shot on both sides performed well. The Towne was
maintained with brave resolution, and more bravely assaulted
by our Seamen and Landmen, presenting their naked bodies
even in the face of danger. Commissary Guine the Governour

of the Towne shewed himselfe to be a man of undaunted
spirit, issuing out of the Towne, bringing up his small shot to
make good their Ambuscadoes, and his valour, exposed that
Towne to unavoydable misery, in voting hee would neither
give nor take Quarter. But I may say of his valour as Saint
Paul said in another case to certaine Christians in his time:
Shall I praise him for this? No; I praise him not; for all our actions
that tend not to the glory of God, lead us to our destructions.
To which indeed this resolution of his had almost
brought him; for leading on his men to face our small shot,
who plyed their Musquets so fast that his men forsooke him,
and himselfe received a shot under his right Pap, which inforced
him to retreat all alone in an orderly pace. He was no sooner
entred the Towne, but the Master Gunner thereof was
also slaine. In which we must not omit to manifest Gods providence
towards us, for our small shot having forced the enemie
out of their Ambuscadoes, pursued them close to the town
Gate, their Gunner having laden a peece of Ordnance with
Case shot, and watching for such an opportunity, having travysed
the Gunne, said to those that stood by, Now you shall
see me make a slaughter of these Roundheads; at which word
a small shot from our forces hit him in the head, after which he
never spake more; whose fall so daunted the enemy both
Commanders and Souldiers, that forthwith they cryed out for
Quarter. The first that forced their entry into the towne was
Captaine Peter Whitty with his Company of Seamen and Subordinate
Officers; Lieutenant Greene and Ensigne Dodson, with
Lieutenant Calte, who led on the Swallow men, and immediately
after them Colonell Langhorne with his Troope of horse.
This Towne of Tinbye was held by the judgement of the most
judicious almost impregnable, it being not to be entred but by
single File: wherein were taken three or foure hundred prisoners,
as many Armes, seven peeces of Ordnance, all which
were taken on Saturday the 9. of March, and on Sunday the
10. Carew Castle was surrendred, in which was consummated
the totall subduing of that Malignant and insulting Party in the
County of Pembrooke; wherein the Lord of Hosts gave his servants

the victory over his and their enemies, which gives us
just cause to put our confidence in him; and in that comfortable
Ejaculation expressed by holy David, to cry and say, By
this we know that thou Lord favourest us, in that thou hast not suffered
our enemies to triumph over us.
            
               The true relation of him who is a most humble and faithfull
servant in this great worke, according to the trust reposed.
            
         
         
            A list of the names of the worthy and valiant Commanders now
in action in the County of Pembrooke, in the service of the
King and Parliament, which opposed the Earle of Carbury.
            Rowland Langhorne, Colonell and Commander in Chiefe.
Symon Thelwell, Colonell Voluntiere. Thomas Langhorne
Serjeant Major. Capt. Rie Powell. Capt. Walter Cuney.
Capt. Iohn Poyer. Capt. Peter Whittye. Lieutenant Owgin.
Lieut. Richard Iones. Iohn Powell Coronet.
         
         
            A list of the uames of the Malignant Commanders taken prisoners
at the Pyll, with their Inferior Officers, in the County of
Pembrooke, by these gallant Commanders above specified.
            John Barlow Esquire, Master of the Ordnance, and Captaine
of a Troope of Horse. Capt. Edmond Brashaw. Capt. John
Brashaw. Capt. John Butler. Capt. Arnold Butler. Capt.
William Marychurch. Cap. John Price. Cap. Fran: Edmonds.
            From the Earle of Carbury we tooke in this action, 4 Castles,
53 peeces of Ordnance, about six or seven hundred
Souldiers, as many armes, and the whole County of Pembrook
totally subdued, and unanimously have taken the Covenant;
and there is great hopes that Carmarthyn and Cardyganshire
will both comply with us.
            
            Commanders which ran away from Haverford West.
            Sir Henry Vaughan, Major Generall of the Army. Sir John
Stepney Knight and Baronet, and Governor of Haverford
West. Sir Francis Flyde Knight, Capt. of a Troop of Horse.
James Martin, Capt. of a Troope of Horse. Capt. John
Edwards.
            Commanders taken at Tynbye, with their inferiour Officers.
            John Gwyn Governour of Tynby, and Commissary of the Army.
David Gwyn Colonell. Tho. Butler Lieutenant Colonell and
High Sheriffe for the County of Pembrooke. Capt. George
Lewis. Capt. Thomas Methell.
         
         
            A Letter sent in generall to the Gentlemen of the County of
Pembrooke, at the request of the Well-affected.
            
               Gentlemen,
            
            AS in duty bound, I have alwaies (in all fidelity) highly
honoured my King, and ever been a lover of my Country;
and as I stand ingaged, God hath called me to be a servant to
both; And in discharge of the Trust imposed in me, I am come
hither to desire your complyance in the protection of the Gospell
in its inherent puritie; as also the Kings honour, with the
Subjects libertie; A worke that every good Christian and
loyall Subject ought to be active in, with the tender of both
his life and fortunes; In which you have the Obligation of our
Saviour to save you harmelesse, who saith, If any man shall
hazard his life, or fortunes, or what is most deare unto him, for
my sake, he shall undoubtedly preserve them. And for your
Counter-securitie, you have three Kingdomes in the body of
the Parliament ingaged. Now why stand you gazing like the
timorous Israelites on the Hoast of the Philistims? Did not a

little youth, David by name, being inspired by the Spirit of
God, slay their Champion, and overthrow that Idolatrous
Hoast? And shall a Jesuiticall and Popish Army, with a Malignant
party, as odious in the sight of God as those cursed Philistims,
make you dismayed? No; be comforted; God and the
State hath presented to you a more probable meanes of deliverance,
in sending this Fleet to your preservation, consisting
of 12 warlike ships, with store of Ammunition and Landforces,
the major part whereof is not yet come in, occasioned
by foule weather at Sea: but upon the first opportunitie of
winde and weather undoubtedly will arrive; and by Gods assistance,
I am confident, that if the Gentlemen of this County
will joyne with me, I make no doubt but we shall drive that
Malignant rout, who indeavour to inslave this Nation under
the yoake of the Antichristian beast, not onely out of this
County, but consequently out of the Dominion of Wales:
wherefore I shall desire the Gentlemen to give their speedy
resolutions; And if any of them shall not comply, let such look
for no favour from me, if it shall please God to give us the
Victory, but what Gods enemies and Destroyers deserve: And
let not any mans heart be afraid, for God hath promised to be
with his in his protecting power, even to the end of the
world: To whose protection I commit you all; Expecting
your Answer, I remaine and rest,
            
               Ever ready to ingage my life with
you in this great worke.
Not answered.
         
         
            A Copie of the Declaration of the Honorable houses of Parliament
now sitting at Westminster, bearing date 1. Febr. comming
to my hand, I caused divers Copies thereof to be taken,
and, with the Letter following, I sent one to Pembrooke; one to
Haverford West, and another to Tynbie.
            
               Gentlemen:
            
            THat you may see with what sincerity of heart wee desire
you may bee reduced to a right understanding of the unhappy

condition you are now in, we shall not neglect neither
our Pen or Sword; the one to discover unto you the strong
delusions of that Antichristian beast, with whom it is foretold
in holy Writ, that the Princes of the earth shall joyne in confederacy,
as also they with him undoubtedly must perish, and
many Millions of poore soules so misled. Oh be wise, and timely
prevent such certaine ruine, by uniting your selves with the
true professors of the Gospel, by whom God hath said he will
pull that beast from his Throne, and they shall reward him
sevenfold for all the evils he hath done unto the Saints. Now if
you shall joyne with us in this great Worke, then shall our
Swords bee active in your preservation; and for your more
ample satisfaction, wee shall present you a most perspicuous
perspective, wherein you may perceive the perfect way both
to your terrestriall and celestiall felicity, being a true copy of
the last Declaration of the Honourable Houses of Parliament,
the which if you please to peruse with a discerning judgement
you may see with what zeale and care those Worthies of our
Land have endeavoured to remove from your eyes those Antichristian
mists, through which, as with an Ignis Fatuus you
have beene so long misguided. And because we know the Patient
thirsts after the cure, we referre you to application of the
meanes presented in that Declaration. The which if they may
give you that satisfaction as may make you truly happy in joyning
with us, our endeavours are fully satisfied, and you shall
finde us.
         
         
            The Summons of the Towne of Tynbie.
            
               Gentlemen,
            
            IN a former Letter unto you, wherein was presented, the late
Declaration of the Honorable Assembly of Parliament, we
the Conmanders of his Majesties ships, desired your resolutions
whether you would comply in the contents thereof, and joyn
with us in the preservation of the Gospell, the Kings honour,
and the Kingdomes safety, to expell the forces brought into

the County by the Earle of Carbury, but receiving no answer,
we are now come before your Towne, to let you know that
unlesse you forthwith yeeld obedience thereunto, we shall
use our best indeavours to force it, in which if it shall please
God to deliver you into our hands, you must expect no other
favour then what is due to Traytors, both to God and their
Country; wherefore I advise you seriously to consider and
wisely to provide for your present and future safety, and
let us receive your speedy answer, that by your timely adhearing
to us; you may prevent the demollishing of your Towne,
by the battering it about your eares with our Ordnance, and
hoping you will preserve it, as also the effusion of much blood
by your sweet complyance we remaine and rest.
            We further declare, that if the Commanders and Souldiers, shall
joine with you in the surrendring of your Towne, that they
shall have quarter for their lives, and goe whither they please,
or continue and be received into the service of King and Parliament.
         
         
            Their Answer.
            
               Gentlemen
            
            YOurs, we formerly received with a Declaration there inclosed
which was required from us before we could peruse
the contents therof, which was the cause of our not returning
any answer thereunto, yours of this present we have received,
wherein you desired us to comply with you for the preservation
of the Gospell, and His Majesties honour, which is
the worke we have vowed to maintaine with our lives and
fortunes, and in so doing, we hold our selves true Subjects to
God, our King and Country; And where you threaten the
demollishing of our Towne, which is not ours to dispose of,
but His Majesties; all which we pray you to take into your
serious considerations, as also the cry of the effusion of much
innocent blood; for answer of the Commanders and Souldiers,
we referre you to the Letter you shall receive from the

Governour of the Towne, and Fort: Thus with our best
respects we take leave and rest.
            
               Your ever loving friend if you please, Richard Wyet
Major, David Hamond, Richard Prickard, John
Rogers, Francis Long.
               Tynbie March, 6. 1643.
               
            
         
         
            The Sommons to the Castle of Tinbie.
            
               Gentlemen,
            
            THese are to require you that upon sight hereof, you imediately
yeeld up the Fort to the use of the King and Parliament,
and in so doing you shall be received into the protection
of that Honourable Assembly, and injoy the benefit
of loyall Subjects; but in case you shall continew in your rebellion,
you must expect to be proceeded against as Traytors
to your King and Country, and enemies to God and the Protestant
Religion: For if you should make one shot at the
Kinges and Parliament Ships, not one of you shall escape for
his life, if it shall please God to give us the victory; consider
of it, and let me receive your resolutions, in which if you
please you shall finde me,
            
               Your faithfull friend to preserve you.
            
         
         
            Their Answer.
            
               Gentlemen,
            
            THis Towne we hold as loyall Subjects to the Kings Majesties
use, for the defence thereof we have His Majesties
gratious Commission which we will endeavour to maintaine
with the hazard of our lives and fortunes, against all opposers
by what colour or pretence whatsoever: This is the resolution
of
            
               John Gwynn. David Gwynn. Tho. Boteler.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   
