<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
            
            THE FELLOW-TRAVELLER Through the CITY & COUNTREY.
         
            I.
            ONe Bernardinus of Siena, who for his merits was after canonized and sainted, was a great Preacher in Milan, where he preached with a great throng and concourse of people, reprehending usually the corrupt customes of those times: This a Merchant of Milan observing, came often to visit him, and earnestly pressed him, that without respect of persons He would preach against

that abominable sin of Ʋsury, which was of late grown so common in that City. In the mean time Bernardinus. searching into the condition and life of the man, findes that he was the greatest Usurer in all Milan, and that he did this to affright others from that vice, and to ingrosse all the dealings by Usury to himselfe alone▪
         
         
            II.
            A rich Merchant of Venice, who had great trading in Naples, seeing one Iaspar of Ravenna to come to Church every morning betimes, and showing their great devotion, either praying or reading his Rosary and Davids Psalter, he fell in love with the man so farre, as that he intrusted in his hands a good summe of money to traffique with, and to share with him in the adventure. The time coming that Jaspar was to give up his accounts of the money and the advantage; He not only denied that ever he received any money

from him, but said also that he never knew the Merchant. The Merchant being after blamed by some of his brethren for trusting a stranger without witnesse or assurance, said to them, It was not Iaspar of Ravenna, but his Prayer▪books and Psalter, which have cheated me. Pii ad mercedem sumus ad mercedem impii, & magis impii quo magis pii.
         
         
            III.
            There being discourse of a Merchant of great credit, yet a sordid Miser and covetous: One John de Medices burst into these words, See the great mercy of God, That all men should trust him that doth not put his trust in God: He trusts not God, who doth not trust him without a pawne, until he have before him as much as he can desire.
         
         
            IV.
            There is a Tale of an old Vsurer, that had nothing in his mouth, but

It is good to be sure; If his Servant went to receive Money, he would follow him, why? tis good to be sure; Though he had lockt the door, he would rise out of his bed to feel it fast, for It is good to be sure, If he had told his money never so often over, yet he will tell it again, O'tis good to be sure. This man fals dangerously sick, and his servant perceiving little hope of life ask'd him, Master, have you said your Prayers, yes sure, said he, I think so, Nay but say them again Master, for it is good to be sure: He bids the Servant open the Chest, and bring him all his gold in it, The Servant having opened it, cryes out, Master, the Devil is in the Chest, he layes his paw upon all the gold, and sayes, It is all his, because it was extracted out of the life-bloud of Widows, Orphans, and poor Wretches; Sayes he so, saith the Extortioner, Then bring me the gold, the Chest, the Devil, and all, It is good to be sure: And hence it may be it is, that usually wlcked men are

said to get the Devil and all. But let this passe for a Tale, in earnest It is good to be sure. And in Goods gotten by Sacriledge, Oppression, Robbery, or bloud, did none of your Learned Counsel advise you of a flaw in your Leases of Conveyance to assure your selves, That you were to have and to hold, this and that, with all the appurtenances, and know you not that Gods Curse upon them and you is a certain Appurtenance to all ill-gotten Goods? Consider this all ye that forget God, It is good to be sure.
         
         
            V.
            Castrutius Governour of Luca, who is reported to be tyrannicall, being condemned by one of his Familiars for banishing and confiscating the goods of one Luparus a rich man, who by all men had the repute of a wise good and faithfull Citizen, thus answered his Friend with a smile, It is not Luparus his goodnesse or wisedome, but his covetousnesse

vetousnesse is punished by me; He cannot be good that is covetous; As long as I knew not his vices, I respected him as my dearest friend, but as soon as Luparus shewed me he lov'd his money more then me, it behoved me also to esteem Luparus his money more then Luparus.
         
         
            VI.
            I have heard the like to what follows related of a Merchant, which it may be was but borrowed from that which is storied of Sigismund the Emperour, who having received a great masse of gold out of Hungary, commanded it, because the day was spent, to be carried into his bed-chamber: where he passed a great part of the night without sleep, at last he gave command to call up diverse of his Counsel and special Friends, who, wondring what was the businesse at that unreasonable time, were brought into his chamber, and there the Emperour showing them the gold, Do you see. saith he, that Hangman

that would not suffer me to take any sleep all this night, do you carry it all away and divide it among your selves, which when they readily did, Now, saith he, you may depart, and I hope I shall take my rest much the better. Anacreon also, when a Talent of gold was given him by Polycrates, did distribute it among others, saying, I hate the gift which keeps a man waking.
         
         
            VII.
            Charles Duke of Burgundy being slain in battell by the Swissers at Kant Anno 1476. had a Jewell of very great value, which being found about him was sold by a Souldier to a Priest for a Crown in money, the Priest sold it for two Crowns, afterwards it was sold for seuen hundred Florens, then for twelve thousand Duckets, and set into the Popes Triple Crown, where it is to be seen at this day, And there it is as much worth as it was sold for at first. And Lewis the eleventh of France gave no reall value to these

toys, when he wore in his hat instead of a Jewell a peece of guilded Lead.
         
         
            VIII.
            There is a Story out of Strabo of a company of people that met at the Market place, where was one that played excellently upon the Harp, so that all crowded to hear him, as being ravished with the Musick; but no sooner did the Market-bell ring, but they were all gone, onely one stayed behinde that was thick of hearing, to whom the Harper said, He was much beholding to him for honouring his musick when others were gone at the ringing of the Market-bell. What the Market-bell, hath that rung? said the deafish man, Nay then farewell, I must be gone too. Pleasure must yeeld to Profit, and the best Musick to the Market-bell.
         
         
            
            IX.
            A publike Notary to the City of Florence, being desired by one that he would speak to some of the chief Citizens in favour of a Petition which he had to them; Go, saith he, and speak for your self, and if you shall finde any one that shall deny you, I will help you; And yet perhaps the man found a fallacy, A bene divisis ad male conjunctos; It is true every where, Pollicitis dives, &c. but it is got among the Proverbs, To promise like a Merchant, and pay like a man of War.
         
         
            X.
            If this offend any Merchant, I may gratifie him as much in showing him an Art to remember any debt he hath forgotten, It is this; One of a weak memory had lent a Friend a Crown, and was much ttoubled that he had quite forgotten, and could not recall the Man or his Name; At last being

so bold as to tell it to his Wife, he was advised by her to walk about; and whosoever met him, and withall bid him Good day or thank'd him, he should presently answer, But I had rather have my Money: The man takes a womans Counsell, many meet him, and not understanding the mystery of these words let him passe; At last his Debtor meets him, and being offended with this Speech, tels him, you might have asked for your own in some more handsome and civill way, but here it is, I have it ready for you. Whatsoever you recover this way, I cry halves.
         
         
            XI.
            I shall also discover to others a way to be wished happy by Merchants while you live, and to be most missed of them when you dye, and this it is in short, to run much in their debts.
         
         
            
            XII.
            One who flattering himself that he lived like a Lord, did eat, and drink, and run in every mans debt, was desired by one (Macrobius relates it of Augustus) that he would only bestow upon him the Pillow he slept on, fince he could sleep so quietly that owed so many debts: I, saith the other, sleep wall upon any pillow, for I leave the cares to you, who will take all the care you can how to be paid: The like is reported of a Noble man in Rome, who being in debt to a Merchant, kept close a while, but weary of that came abroad, whom the Merchant met once or▪ twice, but spared to speak to him, at last he puts him in minde of his debt, and the time long past, and expostulates with him, why he did not think of him, and remember him. Indeed, saith the Nobleman, I have remembred you, and thought again and again how to satisfie you, but finding it to no purpose, I have resolved

to leave all the care and thought of this businesse to your self. It may be, if it were enquired into, one of these was the Author of that Proveab, An hundred load of thoughts will not pay one of debt.
         
         
            XIII.
            A man much in debt had taken Sanctuary in a Monastery, where a Friend of his us'd to come and visit him, and finding him full of thoughts he asked him, though he knew his case, why he was so sad; You know, I think, said he, how many thousands I am in debt, neither will my Creditors yeeld to any composition, and the trouble of this hath so dejected me, that I think I should never have enjoyed my self, but that I happily met with a Book of Patience, which raised up my spirits, or else this sadnesse I think had killed me: why then, saith his friend, have you hopes of satisfying your Creditors? No, said the other; Nay then, saith his Friend, in my oyinion, They should have this Book

of Patience to reade, who, whether they will or no, are forced to want what is owing them.
         
         
            XIV.
            Report being made among a Company of Merchants of one greatly in debt that was dead: In good faith then, saith one of them, he hath carried 500 Duckats of mine into the other world; And, saith another, 200 of mine; And other of his Creditors there spake of other sums; Whereupon one that was amongst them said; Well I see now, that though a man cannot carry any of his own with him into the other world, yet he may carry other mens. It is to be feared that the accounts he may.
         
         
            XV.
            A great Lady in Barbary, being a Widow, called to her an English Merchant trading in those parts, with whom she knew her Husband had some commerce, and asked him if there were nothing owing to him

from her deceased Husband. He after much importunity and many modest refusals, as having been greatly benefited by the dead Barbarian, acknowledged something, and shewed her the particulars; She tendred him satisfaction, and forced him to take the uttermost penny, saying thus, I I would not have my Husbands soul to seek your soul in hell to pay his debts. Non dimittitur peccatum, uisi restituatur ablatum, in Latimesrs old English, either Restitution or Hell.
         
         
            XVI.
            There were some that came to King Alphonsus, who with great earnest requested him in the behalf of a Gentleman, who being a man of pleasure, did (as it seems) owe all but his soul to other men, for his Body was punished in prison; they desiring that a Gentleman should not suffer in his Person; The King flatly denied it, and told them, that such men as had wasted so much Means and Goods

(which are indeed means to do good) neither in the Service of King or Countrey, nor for the benefit of their Parents or Friends, but altogether for the pleasure of their own bodies, should in all reason suffer punishment in their bodies, Qui non habet in aere, luat in corpore, saith the Law.
         
         
            XVII.
            A Florentine Merchant, in stead of the signe of distinction of his house and shop, caused to be painted a fire, and therein some books a burning; to the intent that if any came to buy of him without money, he might answer them, that there was no booking; for as they might see by the picture, his Books were burnt, and nothing could be had without ready money. Others of this Merchants resolution in Italy have written on their Shop-doors this Item in great Letters, Hoggi non si dà a creta, dimansi. Cras credo, hodie nihil. This day there is no▪trusting, but

tomorrow there is. Cras credo, haud hodie sic nego quotidie. I leave to the Merchant to judge whether trusting or not trusting be more advantagious; but the practice of that Merchant was pious, who had no Book for men of Estates, but for poor men he had, to lend them money or wares upon their own day; which if they paid they might borrow again.
         
         
            XVIII.
            A rich man, I doe not say a Merchant, was journeying to the waters for his health, having taken with him a companion for his recreation, A poor man begging on the way, with much adoe he drops him a penny, his companion grutcheth at it, and why (saith he) spend you the money we may have need of? O, saith the man, that he may pray for me, I shall come the sooner to Heaven for this; Nay then, said his companion why did not you give more? Do you think Heaven is to be

got for a penny? methinks you are not so good a Merchant as I took you for, to lay out for a journey to these waters where you hope for health to live a while, and lay out no more for that place where you hope to live for ever; Heaven is little worth if it be worth no more then such men give for it.
         
         
            XIX.
            Thomas Gaine (Guadagni) a Merchant by his Name, and a rich Merchant of Florence, who lent to Francis the first of France five hundred thousand Crowns, but as it seems by the story, one of those who (as the Italian Proverb is) live by their trading and cheating one half of the year, and by their cheating and trading the other half; This man was about to build an Hospitall at Leyden; And having purchased a fair plot of ground for it, he brought his acquaintance thither, and among them one Saltarell a Merchant likewise, and skillfull in Architecture, to whom

he shewed the models and platforms, requiring his advice. I like all this well, saith Salterell, only one thing is faulty, there is too little a space of ground, it will be much too narrow; Why, saith Gaine, do not you see what a large compasse there is? I see it is large, saith Salterell, but if all are to come hither, whom you have brought to poverty, it will not hold the one half of them.
         
         
            XX.
            One speaking of these kinde of works, said, that without restitution and compensation to man they could not be acceptable with God, who hates robbery for a burnt-offering; and that these men were much like one, whom in the Countrey the people by a Nick-name called Gods Shoe-maker, who used to steal Leather, and (it may be touch'd in conscience for it) he would give away the Shoes for Gods sake. And it is now proverbiall, To steal the Hog, and give the feet for Almes.
         
         
            
            XXI.
            There is an unhappy Proverb, Happy are those sons, whose fathers go to the devil; but it is observed to the contrary, even to a Proverb upon Proverb, Malè parta malè dilabuntur, Ill-gotten ill gone; De malé quasitis vix gaudet tertius Haeres, &c.
         
         
            XXII.
            Diverse Proverbs of gain and bargaining, most of them Outlandish, wherein are good Counsels to those that will take them.
            1. A Merchant that gains not, loseth.
            2. He that gains well, and spends well, needs no count-book.
            3. He that hath the spice, may season as he please.
            4. Weigh justly, and sell dearly.
            5. Love is not found in the Market.
            6. Pleasing ware is half sold.
            7. Were there no Fools, bad ware would not passe.
            
               
8 You must lose a Fly, to catch a Trout.
            9 The buyer needs an hundred eyes, the seller not one.
            10 He that praiseth would sell, and he that blames would buy.
            11 Whoso knew what would be dear, should be a Merchant but one year.
            12 Ill ware is never cheap.
            13 That is gold which is worth gold.
            14 Money wants no followers, or Every one fastens where there is gain.
            15 Health without money is half an Ague.
            16 Ready Money is a ready Medicine.
            17 He that hath Money and Capers is furnished for Lent.
            18 With a Floren, the Latine tongue, and a good Horse, a man may travel any where.
            19 To have Money is a fear, not to have it a grief.
            20 Little wealth, little care.
            21 He that hath Lands, hath quarrels.
            
               
22 Pains to get, fear to lose, care to keep.
            23 He that hath little is the lesse dirty.
            24 In a great River Fish are to be found, but take heed lest thou be drowned.
            25 Wealth is like Rheum, it fals on the weakest Parts.
            26 When all men have what belongs to them, it cannot be much.
            27 The Gown is his that wears it, and the world his that enjoys it.
            28 All did come from others, and must go to others.
            29 Riches are like Muck, spread abroad they are fruitful, but on an heap and hoarded they stink.
            30 If a good man thrive, all thrive with him.
            31 The bit that one eats makes no friend.
            32 Presents of love fear not to be ill taken of strangers
            33 He that pitties another remembers himself.
            34 The House is a fine House,

when good Folks are within.
            35 Silks and Sattins put out the fire of the Chimney.
            36 Pay tithes, and give almes, and be as rich as God would have thee.
         
         
            XXIII.
            Other good counsels to those that need them, and to whom they belong.
            a He that looks not before findes himself behinde.
            b To buy dear is no bounty.
            c He that loseth his due gets no thanks.
            d Shop-keepers are Courtiers. They that have wares to sell have words at will.
            e Buy at a Fair, but sell at home.
            f Buy not all you have use of, nor every thing you think you have need of.
            g The dearer it is the cheaper for me (meant I shall save by not buying.)
            h On a good bargain think twice,

for a good bargain is a pick-purse.
            i A good payer is master of anothers purse.
            k A good pay-master starts not at assurance.
            l He that will be surety shall pay.
            m Would you know what money is? go borrow some.
            n He that would have a short Lent, let him take money to be paid at Easter.
            o Sins and debts are alwaies more then one takes them to be.
            p He that gets out of debt, grows tich.
            q He that knows what may be gained in a day, will neither steal, nor beg, nor borrow.
            r He that hath no Trade, it is to his losse.
            s He that hath a good Trade, hath a Purchase made.
            t Little and often fils the purse.
            u Keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee.
            w He that will make a door of gold, must drive in a nail every day.
            
               
x He that labours, and thrives, spins gold.
            y He that lyes long in bed, his Estate feels it.
            z The Citizen is at his businesse before he rise,
            A Play, women, and wine kill a man laughing.
            B Gamesters and Racers never last long.
            C In Building and Gardening you are sweetly undone,
            D A fat House-keeper makes lean Executors.
            E To make a bounce, i. e, to spend a quarters Rent at a meals meat.
            F He that burns his house warms himself for once.
            G The Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at Marriages, and Christians in Sutes.
            H To gain teacheth how to spend.
            I As the year is, your pot must seethe.
            K Every one stretcheth his legs according to his Coverlet.
            L Much spends the Traveller more then the Abider.
            
               
M Who hath more bread then needs must not keep a dog.
            N Sleep without supping, and wake without owing.
            O Mend your clothes, and you may hold out this year.
            P Men get wealth, and women keep it.
            Q Better spare to have of thine own, then ask of other men.
            R A penny spar'd is twice got.
         
         
            XXIV.
            It is not to be reckoned, what publike and private benefit this Alphabet well learn'd may produce: but Democritus intending, howsoever recompensed, to oblige the Merchant, will now discover him a secret how to recover a stolen treasure, without going to the devil (to an Astrologer, I mean, or a Conjurer) it is this. A certain man had digged and hid under ground a good summe of money, to which none was privy but a Neighbour his intimate acquaintance; who

proving false to him digg'd up by night and carried away this treasure. The other seeing himself rob'd, and suspecting him that was the theef indeed, comes to him without any shew of sadnesse, and tels him in a merry manner, that Fortune was every day more and more favourable to him, he had lately come in to him a thousand Duckets more, which the next night he purposed to lay up with his fellows in the place he knew. His Neighbour gaping for the whole, as speedily as may be carries back the money he had stolen, hoping within a day to sweep away every dust of that and the other summe also. But the Owner finding his money returned, carries it home with him, and deceives the Theef his Neighbour.
         
         
            XXV.
            A Countreyman had brought into the Emperour Fredericks Court a Load of Corn, and being gone into his Inne one of his horses was loosed

out of the Cart, and taken away. The News coming to the Emperours ears he cals in the fellow, and asks him if he had heard any thing of his horse, and tels him withall that he should have looked to his Horses, for it was a wonder there being so many Souldiers about him who had use of horses, that his other horse scaped, But the Countreyman telling him, that the other was a Mare, and unfit for service in the Warre, the Emperour bid him then to get up upon his Mare, and ride about to the Stables in the City; which done, the Horse smelt his Fellow which he had missed, and by his neighing betrayed himself and the man that had stolen him.
         
         
            XXVI.
            There is a story of our Sir Thomas Moore, which is thought fit to be transplanted into other Languages; and it may be is not so commonly known at home; He sitting in judgement upon some Theeves and Cutpurses,

there was one grave ancient man upon the Bench that said, it was the carelesnesse of men in keeping their purses that gave occasion to these new sort of Theeves; Sir Thomas disliking this Speech, and adjourning the Sentence till the next day, sends for one of the Cutpurses at night, instructing him what he would have done, and promising him liberty. The next day this man being examined and plainly proved guilty, He answered for himself, that if it pleased the Judge, or any that sate there to hear him, He had a secret to reveal which concerned the good of them all, Sir Thomas bid him take his choice: Then said the Cutpurse, if it please that grave worshipfull Gentleman, who spoke something on our behalf yesterday, I shall tell it to him, the Gentleman coming down to the Prisoner, he draws him aside, and whispers some crochet in his ear, but withall dives into his pocket, and carries his Purse; The Prisoner returning to the Bar, and

giving Sr Thomas a signe that he had done the feat, the Gentleman being seated begins to beg and plead for the Cutpurse, and that he would tell the Iudge what would deserve his pardon: Well then, saith Sir Thomas, but we must help the poor man with a little money that he may live honestly hereafter; upon which motion every one drawing their purse, the Gentleman missing his began to be wroth, and said, that his Purse was gone he knew not how, and which was most sawcily done, stolen from a man of justice in a place of Justice: Sir Thomas returns him his own words he had used the day before, that it was his own negligence, &c. and the Court having good sport, He wished him hereafter not to blame those that lost their purse, or in any way to beleeve or take upon him the defence of Cut-purses.
         
         
            XXVII.
            A noted Merchant of Antwrp spoke to a Painter to draw his Picture,

promising him twelve crowns if he did it well and like him. The work being done, the Merchant repenting of his bargain, and loth to part with so much money for a Picture, quarrels with the Painter, that he had not done it artificially, and that it was nothing like him, and so would not pay him his Money. The Painter carries away the Table, and bethinks himself how to get the money out of him; He addes to the Merchants head, a colour'd Hood, Feathers and Bels, and in this Fools habit hangs him out at his shop for sale. The Merchant who was well known, being taken notice of by all passengers in this dresse, to redeem himself from scorn and laughter, was forced to buy the picture at the price formerly agreed on, and to pay also for the Fools Cap which he had given him.
         
         
            
            XXVIII.
            Philip the second King of Spain, who used to visit Tradesmen shops, came in once to one Jenkyn of Trezzo, about some work he had put out to him, which went but slowly on; and sayes to him, I pray thee Jenkyn tell me if thou hadst a Prentice or man that thou hadst set about a work, and he would not do it, what wouldest thou do with him? I would, saith Jenkyn, pay him his wages, and bid him be gone; The King perceiving what that meant, made him be paid what was owing him; and coming a while after, not finding the work quite finished, he ask'd him; And how now Jenkyn, what wouldst thou do with that man to whom thou payedst wages, if he had not done thy work? Truly, saies Jenkyn, I would give him more time, and not look he should do more then he could.
         
         
            
            XXIX.
            Alexander the Great coming into Apelles his shop; and making his judgement of Pictures very unskillfully, Apelles whispers him in the ear, Sir, I pray you leave off talking of these things, or else speak lower, that the boyes which grinde the colours may not hear you and laugh at you.
         
         
            XXX.
            Philip Alexanders Father maintaining Argument with a Musician in points of his Art somewhat peremptorily, the Musician said to him: God forbid Sir, your Fortune were so bad to know these things better then I, Aliud Sceptrum, aliud Plectrum, as another Musician said to King Ptolomy.
         
         
            XXXI.
            It was commonly said of Nero, that would have had the repute of an excellent Musician, that He was any

thing rather then a Musician, and yet he was a better Musician then a Prince, for he would be either stretching the pins of government too high, or letting them down too low.
         
         
            XXXII.
            Diogenes call'd an ill Musician Cock, Why Cock? (saith he) Because saies Diogenes, when you crow men use to rise.
         
         
            XXXIII.
            A wandring Scholar, that feigned himself a Master of Arts, went a begging to a Smith, and pleaded that he was a Master of Arts; what Arts, said the Smith, the seven liberall Arts, said the other, Those Arts, said the Smith, methinks are not very liberall, which cannot maintain a single man, and I with one Trade maintain my self, wife, and children.
         
         
            XXXIV.
            A Miller, of whom the old Proverb of England was, that every true one hath a golden thumb, and in

Germany they say, when they speak of a stour man, that he is as bold as a Millers shirt, that every morning▪ takes a theef by the neck; One of these going a begging, and desiring a gathering for him, He that commended his case said, Neighbours I pray you consider this poor man; Whom I verily beleeve to be an honest man because he begs, for otherwise he might have lived well by cheating and taking toll as other Millers do. Some may think this Story made by some Scholar in answer to the former, but Democritus assures him he hath it upon record; and that he is of that good opinion not only of Millers, but most Tradesmen, that they may be honest when they go a begging.
         
         
            XXXV.
            Those that cheat others by fair words, would think it somewhat severe to be served as Alex. Severus the Emperout punished a man that by fair promises had abused his Name to the people, he made him be tyed to a stake and choaked with smoak, with

these words, He sold smoak, and he is punished with smoak; this your fairtongued Cheaters would think severe and harsh, and yet it is no more then they deserve, but in conscience they cannot say but Gallienus the Emperors punishment was reasonable, who condemned a Fellow to the Sands for selling glasse instead of jewels; and when in the Theatre all the people stood looking for some Lion or wilde Beast to come forth to devour him; there was at last sent out a dunghill-Cock, and a Cryer, with these words, He cheated others, and himself is cheated.
         
         
            XXXVI.
            Your Fellow-Traveller findes fault both in City and Countrey, and wisheth they may finde the least faults in him, but that both by doing better may make them passages to a better place. In the mean time he is demurring in which he should settle, upon such considerations as these.
            
               
               The City for Wealth,
               The Countrey for Health.
               The City for Plenty,
               the Countrey for Content.
               The City to gain much,
               the countrey to spend to advantage.
               The City for Furniture,
               the Countrey for the use of it.
               The City for Dainties,
               the Countrey for Necessaries.
               The City for Houses.
               the Countrey for Lands.
               The City for Works of Art,
               the Countrey for works of Nature.
               The City for Conversation,
               the Countrey for contemplation
               The City for Strangers,
               the Countrey for Friends.
               The City for Courtesie.
               the Countrey for good turns.
               The City for Wit and manners.
               the countrey for Love and Plaindealing.
               The City for New Fashions.
               the countrey for old customes.
               
                  
The City for Cares.
               the countrey for Pains.
               The City for Winter.
               the countrey for Summer.
               The City to Praise,
               the countrey to enjoy.
            
         
         
            XXXVII.
            Cardinall Hippolitus Nephew to Pope Clement the seventh, although of great Revenues, kept a bountiful house, and had a great many Followers; which the Pope being a niggardly man had often in vain reprehended in him, at last coming once to his house when the Cardinall was rid abroad, He called the Steward, and bid him bring him a Rowl of all his Attendants with their Offices, and being amazed at the great number, he takes a Pen and dashes out as many as he thought uselesse and unnecessary; and giving back the Roll bids the Steward tell his Nephew that it was his will that he should dismisse all those whom he had crossed out,

he might very well spare. Hippolitus coming home at night, the Steward delivers him the Roll with the Popes pleasure, unto which the Cardinall presently answers, It is true what my Lord saith, that I have no need of those many servants whom he hath cancel'd, but since they have need of me, I charge you as yru respect my favour, not to put away any one of them.
         
         
            XXXVIII.
            Aristippus the luxurious Philosopher, being taxed by one for giving six Crowns for a small Fish; Why saith he, what would you have given? Some twelve-pence, said the other, Well, said Aristippus, And six Crowns are no more with me.
         
         
            XXXIX.
            Plato once chiding his Aristippus for buying so many Fishes, Aristippus told him that he had them all for an half penny; It is true, said Plato, and I could have bought them for

so much; Why then, said Aristippus, You see Plato, that I do not love Victuals any more then you love your Money. One Polyenus a Sophister, coming to the same Aristippus his house, and seeing a great Feast providing, began to reprehend the excesse; Aristippus took no notice of it at present, but a while after sends to invite him, who comes and feeds, Now, saith Aristippus, why dost thou blame the Feast thou art willing to partake of, I see thou dost not distike dainty fare but the charges.
         
         
            XL.
            There was a Lady in our Western parts who gave great entertainment to the Gentry thereabouts; She being a good Huswife was up betimes, and call'd to one of her maids out of her window, Is the Piggy serv'd? which a Gentleman, whose lodging was near over-heard; And when the Lady came down in great State into the Great Chamber full of Company, that Gentleman begins, and

Madam saith he, Is the Piggy serv'd? the Lady presently makes answer, You know best whether you have had your break-fast.
         
         
            XLI.
            One us'd to say to his guests whom he invited, If you be temperate and reasonable guests, here is enough for you; if not, here is too much: This would do well for him to think of, but it would do better for another to speak it.
         
         
            XLII.
            And it may be this was but borrowed from what was said of Socrates, to whom one finding fault with the flender provision he had for his guests, Socrates made answer, If they be good guests they will take it well, but if they be bad, it is no matter how they take it.
         
         
            XLIII.
            Cyrus being asked by his Grandfather Astyages, Why he would drink no wine? answered, for fear lest they give me poyson, for, quoth he, I noted yesterday in the Feast of your Birthday,

that some body had poysoned all the wine they drank, because at the taking away of the Cloth, not one of all those that were present at the Feast arose in his right minde.
         
         
            XLIV.
            Crates the Theban finding fault with the cost and waste at great Feasts; others defended it, saying, this expence was made by such as had plenty; Yea but, saith Crates, you do not excuse a Cook if he put too much salt or pepper in your meats, and say, he hath plenty.
         
         
            XLV.
            Diogenes passing by the house of a riotous person, on which he see a note of sale, said, I knew this, that sometime or other thou wouldest spue out thy master.
         
         
            XLVI.
            An Italian Gentleman having sold four Fields of ground to buy him an handsome Turkish Race-horse, and riding him out one day, a Gentleman seeing him gallop, saith to his companion,

O what a large stroak hath that Horse, yes, said the other, You would say so, if you knew all, for he hath leapt over four fields at one stride.
         
         
            XLVII.
            Another Italian Gallant coming into company all sweaty, in a rich Damask Sute; Fie upon it, saies one, how does that Gentleman sweat! and well he may, said another, having an whole Vineyard upon his back; (which it is to be understood that he had sold to put himself in brave clothes.)
         
         
            XLVIII.
            One Johannes Gonzaga having store of money to spare, which though it were his own already, he went to try whose it should be, had lost at dice bag after bag with much ease and pleasure, for He that plays away his money must not value it. At which his Son (Alexander by name) standing by look'd very sadly. Upon which one of the company said, Your Son here looks earnestly when you

will win, that he may have some share with you. You are deceived, saith Gongaza; to think that Alexander hath any such low thoughts; You know Alexander the Great wept, fearing his Father Philip would leave him nothing to win; and my Alexander on the other side, is sad, fearing that I shall leave him nothing to lose; this is called Alexanders example inverted, i. e. Alexander turned inside out, turned out of all, but I do not like these sad jests.
         
         
            XLIX.
            These every one, I beleeve, can parallel with some English Story. M. Cambden tels us of a great Swaggerer, that having lately sold a Mannor of an hundred Tenements came ruffling into the Court in a New Suit, saying, Am not I a mighty man, that bear an hundred houses on my back? which one that heard, said, he might have better employed it in paying his debts.
         
         
            
            L.
            He relates a like Story of one Sir Thomas Rokesby in K. Richard the thirds dayes, who being found fault with for being served so meanly in woodden cups and not in Plate, answered, These homely Cups pay truly for what they hold, and I had rather drink out of wood, and pay gold and silver, then drink out of gold and silver, and make wooden payment.
         
         
            LI.
            A great Gallanto-Flanto-Ranto▪ that had wasted much of his Patrimony, seeing one M. Dutton a rich Gentleman, but plain, in a Gown not of the newest cut, told him that he thought it had been his great Grandthers Gown, It is so (said M. Dutton) and I have also my great Grandfathers Lands.
         
         
            
            LII.
            Your Fellow-Traveller, where he so journed of late, heard a merry conceit of a Gentleman of good means, who drawing towards▪ his end was much visited by a Cosen of his a very Spend thrift, the Gentleman taking notice of his visits then, and knowing what he look'd for, told him once or twice, that he thank'd him for his visits, and that when he died, He would leave him something to make him drink; and at last appointed him he should call for what was in the corner of such a Cup-board. The Gentleman being dead, his cosen comes to call for his Legacy, and when it was told him there was no mention of him in the Will, he demands the key of such a Cup-board, where indeed in the corner was found nothing but something which would make him drink, if you must know, it was a Red herring.
         
         
            
            LIII.
            Sir Edward Cook was wont to say, when a great man can came to dinner to him, and gave him no knowledge of his coming; Well, since you sent me no word of your coming, you shall dine with me, but if I had known of your coming, I would have dined with you.
         
         
            LIV.
            Sir Nicholas Bacon being keeper of the Seal, when Queen Elizabeth in progresse came to his house at Red▪ grave, and said to him, My Lord, what a little house have you gotten, said, Madam, my house is well, but it is you that have made me too great for my house.
         
         
            LV.
            Ferdinand King of Castile in his progresse turned into the house of one Alphonsus a famous man, it was a stately building, but had a narrow stair-case. The King ask'ed him, why he had not made larger stairs to so fair a house? Alphonsus answers, I never

thought so great a Guest would have come into it.
         
         
            LVI.
            Philip the second King of Spain in his Journey was driven by a storm into a Countreymans house, where he was forc'd to take up his lodging; the Husbandman set before him such as he had, and was much troubled at the entertainment of so great a person: In the morning the King calling him to him gave him thanks, and bid him ask wherein he might gratifie him: The man answers, I pray God to preserve your Majesty in life and health, and grant that I may never see you here again.
         
         
            LVII.
            Two Noblemen vying complements who should first go in at a door▪ one of them who seem'd to be forced to go first in (as one must go in first) said to the other, Sir, Now I think you under stand how carefull I am to be your servant, since I so readily obey you in this which puts a shame upon me.
         
         
            
            LVIII.
            One using to come a little too ost to his Friends Table, the Master of the house bid the dinner be stopp'd a while, the man asking some of the Family, Wheu the Dinner would come in, the othar answers, As soon as you are gone Sir.
         
         
            LIX.
            A Stranger being invited to Supper, when he see Cheese the first dish that came in to the Table, said, But in our Countrey they do not bring in Cheese till the end of Supper; It is true, said the other, and so they do with us.
         
         
            LX.
            Augustus Caesar was invited to Supper by one of his old friends, where he had but ordinary entertainment; whereupon at his going he said, I did not know that you and I were so familiar.
         
         
            
            LXI.
            One that was a great Eater coming to a Feast, and complaining, that He had lost his stomack, one of the Company that was a poor man, said, I hope, no body of our house hath found it, for if they have, we are utterly undone.
         
         
            LXII.
            In Genua some Citizens standing at their doors, asked a Countreyman passing by for sports sake, what time of the year Countreymen took most pleasure in; In the Winter time, said the Countreyman, for then we can sit about the fire, rosting of turneps and chestnuts, and lie and sleep most sweetly by the Fire side, what do you think of this life? Truly said one Citizen, You seem somewhat akin to the Hogs: Why, said the Countreyman, What time of the Year do you of the City like best? What but the Spring, Fellow? said the other, when all is fresh and green, when the flowers grow, and the Birds

sing; Then said the Countreyman, You are are some akin to our Asse, who at that time of the year never leaves braying.
         
         
            LXIII.
            Scipio canvasing for Aedile, meeting one of the people, and taking him by the hand, feeling it hard and brawny, ask'd him in jest, Whether he went upon his hands or his feet? at which the Countreyman took such offence that he went about to his companions, and told them how much Scipio scorned the people, which raised such an indignation against him in the multitude, that Scipio lost their suffrages and the office.
         
         
            LXIV.
            A Shepheard having spied an huge Toad gazed upon it, and fell a weeping. And being asked by a Cardinall riding that way why he wept? I Weep, saith he, to think, that I never yet have thanked God for his blessing in

making me a man; and not such an odious beast as this is; See, saith the Cardinall, how these Countreymen steal away heaven from us.
         
         
            LXV.
            To this we may adde what M. Fuller▪ hath from report of a Gentleman travelling in a misty morning, that ask'd a Shepheard, What Weather it would be? It will be, said the Shepheard, what weather pleaseth me, and being courteously requested to expresse his meaning; Sir, saith he, it shall be what Weather pleaseth God, and what weather pleaseth God pleaseth me. This is the only sure way to have our wils.
         
         
            LXVI.
            Pope Paul the third riding once out of Rome to take the air, met a Countreyman, who was an ancient proper man of a lively fresh colour, with a Beard down to the Girdle, in homely but comely clothes, the Pope cals

him to him, and ask'd him of his age and condition of life; The man saies, that he was above fourscore and ten, that he was an husbandman, and lived upon a small Farm he had, and that every day for business or the exercise of his body, he walked on foot a mile or two, that he had a Wife, and Children, Grand▪children, and great Grand-children, which made him stirre about for them. And being asked by what means he kept that strength of Body at that Age, He answered, He had no changes of meat or clothes, he used no sawces, and he drove away all care from his heart as much as he could. The Pope pleased with the man and his answer assign'd him a yearly pension of an hundred Crownes, that he might spend the rest of his time the more cheerfully. He thanks the Pope in these words, I deny not, Holy Father, but that I owe you most humble thanks for your great Bounty; yet I know that this will rather take away from the years of my life, then adde any thing to them.
         
         
            
            LXVII.
            The Lord Verulam in that excellent work of his History of Life and Death, among others, tels a story of an ancient man above an hundred years old, who was brought into the Court for a witnesse upon some ancient prescription; who, when the Testimony was finished, was asked familiarly by the Judge, By what means he came to live so long, the man answers (cross to expectation and with the laughter of the company) by eating before I was hungry, and drinking before I was thirsty.
         
         
            LXVIII.
            Stories of long lived Countreymen in our Countrey are needlesse; for as the same Authour observes, in England there is scarce a Village with any store of people, where there is not to be found some one man or woman of fourscore, And not long since in

Herefordshire there was a Morricedance by eight men, whose age reckoned together made up eight hundred years compleat, some having over and above what the other wanted of an hundred.
         
         
            LXIX.
            Two Citizens being rid abroad in the Spring, by chance they heard the Cuckow singing: Now it is known who are noted by that Birds name, where a poor injur'd man must suffer more also by the scorns of foolish wantons; The Citizens hearing this Bird, began to laugh one upon another, and to ask, To which of them the Bird dies sing? and from contesting they fel to contending, from jest to earnest, and to a Sute of Law at last; where the Lawyers having tam'd their purses sufficiently, the Judge in the end pronounced this Sentence, that the Cuckow did sing to neither the one nor the other of them, but to her self only.
         
         
            
            LXX.
            There is an old superstitious saying among common people, that if an Hare crosse the way it is bad luck, but if a Woolf it is good luck; unto which it is not amisse to adde this Story which I finde of a Countreyman, who going with his Cart and Horses to fetch wood, an Hare meeting him he drew back again; The next day going again, his man spies a Woolf in the Wood, and came and told him; O, saith he, Master, never fear, good luck, good luck, Pliny is witnesse. A little while after, they being about their work, and the horses let loose for grasing, the Woolf comes and singles out one of them, and after he had saluted the Horse clawing him after his manner, he suddenly thrust his head into his belly and pulled out his guts, which the Servant having seen, runs to his Master, and tels him, that good luck was gotten into the middle of

their Horses belly; which the good man found true, and became a sport to his neighbours. Of such and thousands more of these Vulgar Errours, there is a Learned Work extant of an excellent man Doctor Brown, as likewise of D. Primrose in Points of Physick; but concerning the originall of this in hand, there is another learned man which gives a pretty guesse; that the observation is true indeed, yet no more but this, that if an Hare crosse our way (and scape our catching) it is bad luck; but if a Woolf crosss our way (and be gone, and so we escape his setting upon us) it is good luck: and this being thus spoken at first in jest by some witty fellow, came after to be taken in earnest by the simpler sort▪
         
         
            LXXI.
            A certain Countesse of the City Cosence in Calabria, her Husband lately dead, being to certifie by letter the Corporation, who were her

Subjects, of their new Tenure, subscribed, The sad and unhappy Widow, &c. They thinking to imitate her, and that they must give her her own Titles, direct their letter back, The Aldermen, Magistrates, and Governours, &c. To the sad and unhappy Widow our Lady, &c. and in the beginning, Most illustrious and sad Lady, &c. These people, although they bred the famous Telesius, yet why they were called Brutii, you may partly guesse by this story.
         
         
            LXXII.
            Nic. Picinninus a great Souldier but a blunt man, meeting Antonius Panormitanus a famous Scholar, and intending to passe a Complement, thus bespeaks him, May I not live Antony, if I do not wish my self blinde as oft as I see you. Panormitan troubled at these words, sayes, Why so my Lord, since there is none that does honour your valour and brave actions more than I? Picinninus smiling, and

straing to expresse himself most eloquently, Thus it is, saith he, As oft as I see you with so great store of Learning, and then again consider my self with so great store of little wit; I both hate my self as contrary to you, and I also reverence you as a learned man.
         
         
            LXXIII.
            A Woman, whose childe was a naturall Fool, was directed in waggery to a Gentleman in Florence, who had been distracted, she comes to him, and saies, Sir, I was told that you were once out of your wits, and I have a childe that is now in that case; I pray you tell me how you were cured; The Gentleman perceiving the simplicity of the woman, said, O good woman, do not go about to cure him, for I never had a merrier time in all my dayes then when I was mad.
         
         
            
            LXXIV.
            A Prince kept a Fool, and one of the Court to vex him said, Sirrah, I will kill thee, he run trembling to the King, and told his danger; The King saies to him, Take a good hear, if he kill thee, I will hang him; No, saith the Fool, not so, but I would have him hanged one day before he kill me.
         
         
            LXXV.
            A Fool being brought to Court, and commended to a German Prince, the Prince ask'd him whether he would live with him, No, saith the Fool, I will live with my Father: why wilt thou not live with me but with thy Father, said the Prince; Why, saith he, my Father got a Fool of his own for himself, and do you get a Fool of your own as my Father did.
         
         
            
            LXXVI.
            Another Noblemans Fool that was made the Neatheard, when he see them at home in trimming their horses to cut off their tayls; he gets him into the Field, and cuts off all the Oxen and Cows tayls, and comes loaden home with them, shouting and singing; and when some of the house chid him, I love, saith the Fool, to have handsome cattle as well as my Master.
         
         
            LXXVII.
            A certain Rope-dancer got a fall, at which all the standers by fell a laughing, only one natural fool there began to cry; some asking him why he cry'd, because (saith he) all men call me a Fool, and yet I ever kept the ground, and never went in the Ayre, or got a fall as that Fellow did. Democritus laughs to see some of his Readers so solemn as to be weary

of these few fooleries, and others again to long as much for more of them, as the people did beg of Demades and Demosthenes to end their merry tales. And this would not be the book it promiseth unlesse it did satisfie a little the latter sort of Readers▪ therefore to proceed.
         
         
            LXXVIII.
            There is one who is somewhat a kin to our Democritus, who hath gathered to his hand the Priviledges of beggars. 1. They are Citizens of the whole world, Ʋbiquitarians, every house is theirs, they are never out of their way. 2. They can lose nothing, and every day they are a gaining. 3. A Gift of theirs is more worth, and men give more for it then they do for any thing they can buy in the market. 4. No body ever begs of them, but they beg of every Passenger. 5. No man sues any of them at Law, no Creditor troubles them; if they sue any other, no Lawyer

looks for fee of them, and their cause, Pauperis causa is a plea to be heard before any others. 6. No body envies them, no body slanders them, no body takes notice what they do or say. 7. They sleep better in straw then others on down-beds. 8. They fear neither Souldiers nor Robbers, nor Theeves. An hundred Souldiers cannot spoil a naked man, Cantabit vacuus. That which thou hast not no man can take from thee: An earthen pot once broke can take no more harm. It is in vain for pilferers to think to finde that in their hovels at night which they themselves cannot finde at day. 9. They are free from all Customes, Taxes, or Excises; and this they have by birthright, and by the Law of Nations, and they pay nothing for this freedome. 10. Moreover all Princes and great men, Citizens and rich men are tyed to pay tribute to them; and to provide for them before they provide for Horses, Hawks or Hounds, Feasts or fine clothes, and before they offer

to fill the other bag. And lastly, if there had been no sweetnesse in Poverty, sure so many wise men of old had not made choice of it, so many Philosophers had not beg'd, Fabritius had not preferred his Turneps before the Samnites gold, and Alexander Monarch of the world had not longed to change states with Diogenes, whereas we do not reade that Diogenes desired or cared to be Alexander.
         
         
            LXXIX.
            Diogenes begging (as divers Philosophers then used) did beg more of a Prodigall man then of the rest there present; Whereupon one said to him, See your basenesse, that when you finde a liberall minde you will take most of; No (said Diogenes) but I mean to beg of the rest again.
         
         
            LXXX.
            We reade of a famous Rogue (Rogue à Rogator) in Austria, who

having spent a fair Estate of his Fathers, and was turned Beggar, would say, that his Father had payd yearly fifty Crowns in tributes and taxes, and so much in servants wages, &c. all which trouble and charge he had eas'd him in, and made an end of; the same fellow would say, that he was not turned Beggar but Courtier, for men had rather see him without doors then within.
         
         
            LXXXI.
            There is a famous story of one, and some name his Countrey to be Spain, who being to be whipped through a Towne, walked with a grace very stately; whom one pitying and bidding him mend his pace to rid himself the sooner out of his pain, my Gentleman took it ill, and said, What is it to thee, Fellow, how I go? when thou art whipt thou mayest use what pace thou pleasest, and let me now, I pray thee, use the pace which I think most becomes me.
         
         
            
            LXXXII.
            A clamorous Beggar following a Gentleman, who had not at present to give him, and would not tell the Beggar so, the Gentleman at last turns back, and sayes, a man knows not to whom to be charitable among so many of you, for there are some such curst fellows, that if a man do not give them something, they will curse him to his face. O Sir, sayes the Beggar, you are mistaken in me, I am none of those; Then, said the Gentleman, Go your wayes, I will try you for once.
         
         
            LXXXIII.
            One hearing Beggars earnestly and importunately craving for Gods sake, &c said, These men that thus begg or rather challenge in Gods Name do live by him whom I am afraid they seldom serve, for I have seen hundreds of them before Church-doors, and scarce one of them in ten years within the Church in

the time of service. The same person when he heard any of them singing or roaring, would say, I cannot tell how to pity this man for he is merrier then I; and when he heard others in a set tune and frame of fine words, he would say, this man is a workman at his trade, he hath no need of me.
         
         
            LXXXIV.
            When the Emperour Frederick the third was at the Diet at Norimberge, a Beggar comes to Court, and is earnest to be let in, for he was the Emperours Brother, the Beggar being importunate, the News comes to the Emperour, who bids him be call'd in before him, and asks him whence he▪ came to be his Brother, the Beggar answers, from our first Father Adam; the Emperour bids one of his Followers give him a Sous; the bold Beggar comes on again, and sayes, It doth not become you, Most Noble Emperour, who are so rich to give your Brother so poor a gift; Go thy

way, saies the Emperour, and if every one of thy Brethren give thee as much, thou Wilt be richer then I am. The like Story is reported of another Beggar, who came to Albert Duke of Saxony, begging a Penny of him for kindred sake: What kindred? said the Duke, by Adam, said the Beggar, the Father of us all: Get thee gone, said the Duke, for if I should give a Penny to every one of my kinsmen by Adam, it is not my Patrimony and Dukedome would serve to do it.
         
         
            LXXXV.
            Among this rabble it were fit Democritus should tell you something of Cheaters, but he is afraid honest men would be angry with him to teach others how to cheat them; and the Cheaters would laugh at him to offer to teach them who may be his Masters: they that live about Tyburn can tell you how the Cheater is cheated at last. Though there be more Cheaters in City and Countrey then

those that hang in your way, and it is known what he of old laugh'd at, to see the Great Theeves send the little ones to the Gallows, to see little theeves in iron Chains, and great theeves in gold chains.
         
         
            LXXXVI.
            Thirlby Bishop of Ely being Embassadour at Rome in King Edward the sixths dayes, one of his men having negligently laid his Livery Cloak in his Lodgings had lost it, whereat the Bishop chiding his carelesnesse, the Servant answered, He never suspected Theeves in so holy a place as Rome▪ Away Fool (quoth the Bishop) when thou comest into a strange place, think all men to be Theeves, yet take heed thou do not call them Theeves.
         
         
            
            LXXXVII.
            Of such as have come from Beggery to Wealth and Dignities, Examples are every where to be had, but their severall behaviours and the censures of men hereupon are observable. Agathocles though but a Potters Son was exalted to be King of Sicily, and he was so far from being ashamed of his Birth, as that when he was King he would be served in no other then Earthen plate▪ to shew how nobly he was descended. And one Willigis, who was but a Wheelers son, was advanced to be Archbishop of Mentz, one of the Prince Electors in Germany, and he had for his Coat of Armes, three Wheels, with this Motto, Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris, O Willigis remember Whence thou camest.
         
         
            
            LXXXVIII.
            One Isaac born to digging and delving, yet by his valour and wisedom having gain'd the highest honours under Bajazet the Turkish Emperor, had hanging in his Hall, where he gave audience and accesse to all comers, a Spade, wherewith he used to dig for his living, and he would often show it his Children, telling them, That was his Armes, and as often as they see this, they should think by the like diligence and integrity to prove worthy of their Emperours favour.
         
         
            LXXXIX.
            Sixtus V. Pope being born in a thatcht cottage, of mean Parents, in a poor village Montalte, would sport himself with it, and say, that He was born of a most illustrious house, for the Sun in one moment did enlighten it in a thousand chinks and crannies.
         
         
            
            XC.
            Sigismund the Emperour much honoured Learned Counsellours and Scholars, and would say, that He could make a thousand Knights in one day, but he could not make a Doctor in a thousand years: Which Speech being distasted by his Nobles, the Emrour qualified it thus; That he could make Noble and rich whom he would, and such they were if he made them so, But he could not make a man wise and learned; this was an ability wherewith God had ennobled a man: It is true, extraordinary Gifts or parts (as men call them) with great pains in publique services, lay the foundation to Nobility, and extraordinary education, with noble dispositions and actions, does preserve and continue it▪
         
         
            
            XCI.
            Harmodius a Nobleman born, upbraiding Iphicrates a valiant Captain, that he was a Shoemakers son. My Nobility (saith the Captain) takes its beginning from me▪ and thine in thee is taking her Farewell. The like we finde, that when in the presence of King Alfonsus they were discoursing of a famous man Nicolaus Picinninus, and one was commending his skill in Military affairs, another the power he had with his Souldiery, another his valiant Acts, and some one thing some another: There was one conceited of his own Nobility, who interpos'd, saying, These were something indeed, if he were not a Butchers Son. To whom Alfonsus replied, And I truly had rather be Nicolaus Picinninus then some Kings Son. And the King hath the Poets suffrage for this speech.
            
               
               Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
               Aeacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas;
               Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.
            
         
         
            XCII.
            Fabius Grimanus being Provost of Padua under the state of Venice, a Company of Students had set on a ragged starveling poor Fellow, whom they hired for ten Crowns, that he should meet the said Provost as he came out of the Church, kisse his hand, and audibly challenge him for his brother. Grimanus not awhit daunted at this new greeting, courteously re-salutes the man, and conducts him into his Palace; where having examined and understood the whole contrivance of the businesse, he presently commands the gates of the City to be shut, and call'd before him all those Students who had an hand in this project. When they

appeared, he tels them with a calm countenance, that by their kindenesse and diligence this day he had found a Brother, but so needy and bare, that to set him forth as was becoming a Brother of his, there would be need of no little money: Wherefore he desired them, as they had taken no small pains in finding him out a Brother, so they would show the like liberality in apparelling him, and every of them pay down a convenient summe of money towards it. They excuse, beg and beseech him, that he would pardon this fault, that it was done in jest, out of rashnesse of youth and wantonnesse. But the Governour was earnest, and told them his Brother must have better clothes, and Money for Expences too: nor did he dismisse them his custody, till every one had laid down an hundred Crowns apeece for this new naked brother whom they had begot for him.
         
         
            
            XCIII.
            A certain Antiquary came to the Emperour Maximilian the second, desiring leave of him to search the Archives and ancient Records to deduce his Pedigree. And what moves thee to this? saith the Emperour, Only, said the other, a desire to serve and satisfie your Majesty and the whole Austrian Family. The Emperour replyes, You may do as you please, but I fear me, if you be honest and accurate in your search, you may at last bolt out some Cobler or the like Founder of our Family.
            
               Majorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum,
               Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud quod dicere nolo.
            
            In great Pedegrees there are Governours and Chandlers.
         
         
            
            XCIV.
            It is delivered from Mr. Fuller as a thing most strange, and yet most true, that the Armes of the Duke of Rhoan in France, which are Fusibs or Lozenges, are to be seen in the Wood or Stone throughout all his Countrey; Yea, and the same, saith he, is observed in England, for the resemblance of Stars, the Armes of the Worshipfull Family of the Shugburyes in Warwickshire, are found in the stones within their own Mannor of Shugbury. But though stones of such forms be rarities, yet not so strange to those that have consulted Gaffarell, and Lapis Asterites is by M. Cambden set down as a known and no strange stone, no stranger then Stella piscis or Stellio the breast; They were indeed most strange, if it were certain that the Armes of these Families were before the stones, and such stones no where else to be found; but that these Families should take their Armes upon observation of such a Rarity within

their Grounds, is not strange, and to make such stones Touch-stones of Nobility, would much shrink and straiten the Families of Nobles.
         
         
            XCV.
            One Benedictus Albizius a Nobleman and a Scholar came to one newly made Cardinall, to give his old Friend joy of his new honour. But the Catdinall looking strangely on him as if he knew him not: Albizius speaks thus to him; You Cardinals, I see, are to be condoled rather then congratulated; for as if by gaining a Dignity you had lost your senses, you can neither see nor hear; you cannot discern your friends face nor voice; and it is well since you acknowledge not them if you know your selves. The Lord Verulam reports the like of a Gentleman in Italy, that wrote to a great Friend of his advanced to be a Cardinall, That he was very glad of his advancement for the Cardinals own sake, but he was sorry that himself had lost so good a friend.
         
         
            
            XCVI.
            There is another Story registred, and as the shame would have it, of another Cardinall too; One of the Trent Doctors that Marrow of Theologists▪ as Campian saith, who being a Fishermans Sonne born, whilest he was in his inferiour Orders▪ would alwaies cause a Net to be spread under his Table▪cloth, that at his rising from mear, when the Cloth was taken away, the Net might minde him whence he came; But being after saluted with a Red Hat, the Net was laid aside; and so one desiring a reason for that, he said, Why? I have now caught what I fisht for. Thus the Abbot went stooping while he was seeking the keyes of the Abbey, but when he had found them, he looked bolt upright.
         
         
            
            XCVII.
            One coming into an Inne in mean clothes, was suted accordingly with mean company, where not finding himself respected according to his worth, he began to brag largely of his Parentage, before those to whom such discourse is distastefull and ridiculous; to whom one of the men said bluntly, Get you hence with your Gentility, I am sure our Millers horse is nobler then you, for he never goes abroad without a man to wait upon him. Another the like is storied of a stranger tediously bragging before some Countrey fellows of his Noble kindred, whom when one of them flouted; Thou mean fellow, said he, dost thou know wherein Nobility consists? Yes, very well, said the Countreyman, it consists in being an hundred mile off from where a man was born, or threescore from where he is known, Chi si loda si lorda, saith the Italian; He that boasts of his Gentility

bewrays it, and bewrays his own basenesse, for as they have also in another Provetb, Ʋnlucky children doe most commend their Parents.
         
         
            XCVIII.
            A Spanish Embassadour coming to see that so much cry'd up Treasury at S. Marks in Venice, fell a groping at the bottom of the Chests and Trunks; And being asked why he did so? He answered, In this among other things my Masters Treasure differs from yours, in that His hath no bottome, as I finde yours to have, alluding to the Mines in Mexico, Peru, and other parts of the Western Indies. This may hold in the comparison of Estates in Lands and Moneys, Fundus non habet fundum.
         
         
            
            XCIX.
            This and the former should have had their place before, but perhaps they will do well here for a closing consideration to men of great Estates in City or Countrey. Selymus the great Turk, as he lay languishing (his incurable disease still encreasing) leaning his head in the lap of Pyrrhus his Bassa, whom of all others he most loved I see, said he, O Pyrrhus, I must shortly dye without remedy; Whereupon the great Bassa took occasion to talk with him of many great matters; And amongst others, that it would please him to give order for the great wealth taken from the Persian Merchants in divers places of his Empire, perswading him to bestow the same upon some notable Hospitall for relief of the Poor. To whom Selymus replyed, Wouldst thou Pyrrhus, that I should bestow other mens goods wrongfully taken from them, upon works of Charity and Devotion for my own▪

Vain-glory and praise? Assuredly I will never do it, Nay see they be given again to the right owners; Which was forthwith done accordingly. I am afraid this Turk shall rise up in judgement against some Christians; for either he is no Turk, or we no such Christians as we should be.
         
         
            C.
            A Fable of Aesop shall close this Period of our Travels: The Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant, were resolv'd to turn Merchants, and to be Partners in the same adventure; The Bats stock was ready money which he had borrowed: the Brambles was wool and cloth which he had catch'd from sheeps backs in passing by) and the Cormorants was a Treasure of a wrack which he had found as he was fishing by the shore. Having put in their lading, they set to Sea. But a storm arising, their ship sunk, and their goods were all lost▪ and themselves

only escaped to land; Now ever since the Bat fearing creditors, keeps close all day, and walks only some few short turns at night; And the Bramble is catching at every passenger to get some more cloth; and the Cormorant follows the Seashores fishing for his living and watching what the Sea will cast up. The Morall of this Fable you must not look for out of your boyes books, for they that affixed those Morals have seldome reached the wit of Esop. Erasmus thinks this Fable fathered on Aesop and unworthy of him, but Erasmus did not so well look into it; Democritus who is an acquaintance of Aesop▪ and knows much of his minde, thinks the Fable his own legitimate and that Aesop here points at three sorts of men who get their living three severall waies, and they seldom thrive or grow rich; The first is, of such as live by borrowing, and purchase by Use money, and these commonly run so much in debt that they are forced to turn Bats, and dare not shew their heads.

Others with the Cormorant gape for wracks, losing what may fall, and live upon hopes, and feed upon shoares, and places vacant▪ desart, and forsaken by others, where they fish for their living by new inventions and fancies; and of this sort are Astrologers, Fortune-tellers, Chymists, Mountebanks, Projectors, and Cheaters of many sorts. The third and worst sort of men who are figured by the Bramble, are those that live by snatching, as Theeves, Robbers, Pirates, mercenary Souldiers, quarrelsome Sollicitors, Informers, and all seditious persons, who sit upon other mens skirts, and are ready to rent and tear all they meet. And all these, as is noted in the Fable, keep their old courses, and are seldom reclaim'd to a better kinde of life, the debtor runs on borrowing till he run himself out of all; the Projector, &c. never leaves his Fancies till he be a Beggar: Nor the theef, &c. will ever cease stealing till the Gallows makes an end of him: And the goods of all these are well set down in the

Fable to be lost and cast away; for Money borrowed or found, or stolen, as it is quickly gotten, so it is quickly gone, and nothing but what is gained by honest care and pains hath a blessing to be lasting.
         
      
   
   
      
         
            
            
            THE FELLOW▪ TRAVELLER In Entercourse among STUDENTS AND SCHOLARS.
            Magna pars studiosorum Amoenitates quaerimus.
            Printed in the Year, 1658.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FELLOW▪ TRAVELLER AMONG Students & Scholars.
         
            I.
            LAwyers and Physicians must here have the first place, because they live when most other Scholars go a begging; and they are amphibia, they get their living in City or Countrey, at home or abroad; though one saith, it is a bad signe of a bad

place to live in, where there are either many Lawyers or many Physicians.
         
         
            II.
            An Advocate pleading for his Desendant, bespeaks the Judge with a Preface, that he might have his Lordships leave to pleade in the behalf of that good man, the Judge assenting, Now my Lord, said the Lawyer, you must in justice acquit this man, whom you have allowed to be a good man; the Judge replied, It is true, a good man he is, and shall be for me, unlesse the proofs against him make it evident that he is guilty. Quod non improbatur, prasumitur.
         
         
            III.
            A Prisoner indited for Felony was asked by the Iudge what he had to say for himself, Truly My Lord, sayes he, I did mean no hurt to the man from whom I stole, only it was an ill custome that I had gotten, Why then, sayes the

Iudge, if it be thy custome to steal, it is my custome to hang up Theeves.
         
         
            IV.
            There were two came before Aristides, the Accuser said, O Aristides, this man did you such an injury at such a time, thinking by this suggestion to have made him partiall. Aristides replies, Friend, I sit not here to hear what he hath done against me, but what he hath done against thee: This was Aristides the Iust, and Exuit personam Judicis, qui amici vel Hostis induit.
         
         
            V.
            In Flanders a Flemmish Tiler falling from the top of an House kill'd a Spaniard passing by, though himself escap'd alive by the breach of the fall. Some of the Spaniards kindred prosecutes this Tiler very hard for his life, urging Lex Talionis, the Iudge answered, that since he did urge that law, he should have it,; He should go

up to the top of the house, and thence fall down upon the Tiler. Praestare culpam homo debet, non oasum.
         
         
            VI.
            One Petrus Niger travelling thorow a Countrey village, a Dogge comes out of a House, and runs at him fiercely; but he having a picked staffe in his hand runs the Dogge through and kils him. The Owner of the Dogge draws the man before a Iustice, and he chides the man for being so cruell; And why (said he) must you use the iron end of the staffe, and not rather have beaten him with the fore-end, Because, said the man, the Dog ran at me with his teeth, and not with his tayle.
         
         
            
            VII.
            There were three young Fellows had gathered a great deal of money by Piracy, and resolv'd at last to goe to such a City to spend the rest of their life more securely. And that they might agree upon what they had got in common, they put all their money into a Scriveners hands, upon these terms, that He should not part with a Penny to any one of them, unlesse they all three were present. A while after, one of them more cunning then his fellows, perswades them, it would be much better for them to buy some house and ground, that they might use in common and live upon together. Upon which they go to the Scrivener, and give him warning to call in their money in readinesse, which they world shortly call for. In the mean time they bargain for an House, and one day when two of them were riding abroad, the third cunning fellow tels them, there

was present use of fifty Duckats for some furniture he had bespoke for the House; which they bid him ask for of the Scrivener, and withall as they rid by, bid the Scrivener give their Partner what he called for. He comes presently after, and takes up all the money, layes it on horseback, and conveys it and himself out of the way. After, the other two returning home, the Scrivener tels them, how according to their appointment he had delivered up to their Partner all the Money. They finding it in vain to pursue their Fellow, sue the Scrivener in Court, alledging he had broke Covenant, the Condition agreed upon being, that he should deliver no money to any but when they were all present. The Scrivener not a little troubled at this, consults one Gellius Aretinus a crafty Lawyer, who upon some deliberation gives him this advice, that he should confesse in Court, that it was an oversight in him to pay the money, and that he was ready to pay it again, according

to the tenour of the Writing drawn between them, which was that it should not be paid but when they three were present; Wherefore let them bring forth their third man, and he should be ready to pay them. This Democritus was more willing to transcribe at large, that it may be exemplary; for he hath heard the like advice mutato nomine, with little alteration of the case, given by our famous M. Noy.
         
         
            VIII.
            Cicero had occasion to call in Claudius Popilius an ignorant Lawyer for a witnesse, He coming in, said, He knew nothing, Cicero replyes, I pray you think not that I am asking you in point of Law.
         
         
            
            IX.
            In the accusation of Clodius a seditious young Nobleman, Cicero among others gave in evidence upon oath against him, but the Iury (which consisted of 57▪) being for the major part bribed, passed against the Evidence. One day after in the Senate, Cicero and Clodius falling out, Clodius upbraided him, saying, The Jury gave you no credit. Cicero answered, Five and twenty gave me credit, but there were two and thirty that gave you no credit, for they had their money aforehand. The same Iury, before they gave up their verdict, prayed of the Senate a Guard, that they might do their conscience freely against Clodius, Catulus the next day seeing some of them that had acquitted him together, said to them, What made you to ask of us a Guard? were you afraid your money should have been taken from you?
         
         
            
            X.
            A Merchant in a Suit he had with a Countryman, had sent in to the Iudge for a Fee they call it (in plain English a bribe) a Vessell of Oyle; His adversary understanding of it presented the Iudge with a Fat Hog; the Countreyman carrying the case, the Merchant came to the Iudge, complaining and upbraiding him with his gift; the Iudge answered him, that he did remember his Oyle, but there was a filthy great Hog, burst into his House, and had broke the Vessell, and spilt all the Oyle. This man did indeed oleum & operam perdere, The Lawyers Tongue like the tongue of a ballance, inclines that way where there is most weight.
         
         
            
            XI.
            There was a Iudge in Poland called Ictus (it may be like Dives in the Parable, but named so by the Lawyers abbreviation for Juris-consultus, for most Lawyers are such) who a long time had stood for a poor man the Plaintiff against a rich man the Defendant; but in the end he took a Fee of the Defendant, and a considerable summe, stamped according to the usuall stamp of the Countrey, with the Image of a man in compleat armour, and in the next Sessions in Court judged the cause in favour of the Defendant. But being taxed for it in private, he shewed his friend the Coyn he received, and demanded of him, Quis possit iot armat is resistere? Who is able to stand against such an Army as this? This mans Conscience was not Musket-proof.
         
         
            
            XII.
            Laurentius Medices canvasing for a place in Florence, a Friend told him that he could help him with such a mans suffrage, For, said he, for a pottle of wine a man may leade him which way he please. Is it so? saith Laurentius, What shall become of me then, is some body give him two pottles of wine? Precio parata vincitur precio Fides.
         
         
            XIII.
            Sir Thomas Moore had sent him by a Suitor in Chancery two silver Flaggons, when they were presented by the Gentlemans Servant; He said to one of his men, Have him to the Cellar, and let him have of my best Wine: And turning to the Servant he said, Friend, tell thy Master, if he like it, let him not spare it. And when his Lady at another time offered him a great Bribe in the behalf of a Suppliant, he turned away with these

words, Gentle Eve, I will none of your Apple. Rejecit alto dona nocentium vultu.
         
         
            XIV.
            Marcus Curio had a bribe sent him to tempt him to be unfaithfull to his Countrey, the Messenger that brought the reward of iniquity found him at dinner with a dish of Turneps, and proffered him the Money, but he refused it, saying, Let this be proffered to those that cannot be content to dine with Turnips as I do.
         
         
            XV.
            Alexander sent to Phocion a great summe of money, Phocion said to the Messenger, Why doth the King send to me? the Messenger answered, Because he takes you to be a good man: Phocyon replies, If he think so, pray let him suffer me to be good still.
         
         
            
            XVI.
            A Noble Lord (who for his other Excellencies shall be namelesse) being in a great office where he us'd to be (as the Lord Bacon phraseth it) twice paid, and though he himself cared not for Money, receive Bribes by the back door of Servants, being put out of his place for it, that day passing through the Hall where his Gentlemen sate at dinner, they as their manner was rose up at his coming by which he observing said to them, Nay Gentlemen sit down, for your rising is my Fall.
         
         
            XVII.
            Alphonsus Pazzius (perhaps only nick-nam'd so from his simplicity) a Nobleman of Florence had a Suit at Law, where his adversary brawling with him, said, that it was a signe he was not well in his wits, since his Father had appointed twelve Guardians

over him, Alphonsus answers, My Father knew that he who hath Lands hath quarrels, but if he had known that I should have had to do with thee, he would have given me four and twenty Guardians.
         
         
            XVIII.
            Gerson tels of an ancient Matron who came to Orleance, and going to see one of their Innes of Court, asked what was the businesse of those Students there? One answered, they studied Law to be able to pleade in the Countrey; Alas, said the woma what a Countrey will there be when all these are let loose, for in our Covntrey we have but one Atturney, and  sets us all by the ears together. One was saying, that the number of Lawyers would marre the Trade; O no, said M. Heywood, for ever the more spaniels in the fields▪ the more game. Lawyers, if they do not finde quarrels, can make them.
         
         
            
            XIX.
            Rodulphus Count of Habspurg, who was the first that brought the Imperiall dignity into the Austrian Family, had some Sutes with his Neighbours, but one especially with a potent Abbot, The Earl once comes upon the Abbot at dinner time, and makes himself his guest, his followers wondring at it. After dinner having talked a while with the Abbot, he made an agreement with him. And at his departure said to his Followers, He that hath three Sutes in Law, and hath composed two shall do well to make end of the third; And this course proved happy to the Earl, for that Abbot afterwards became a great help to him against his Enemies; They that have tried it say, that a bad agreement is better then a good Judgement.
         
         
            
            XX.
            There was a Minister to be deprived for Non-conformity, who said to some of his Friends, That if they deprived him, it should cost a hundred mens lives; The party understood it, as if being a turbulent fellow, he would have mov'd sedition, and complain'd of him, whereupon being convented and apposed upon that speech, he said, his meaning was, that if he lost his Benefice he would practise Physick (where he should be Homicida cum privilegio) and then he thought he should kill an hundred men in time. In a Millers hand, saith Guevard, we tr only our meal, and in a Lawyers hands only our Goods, &c. but in a Physicians hands we trust our lives.
         
         
            XXI.
            There was a Physician commended to a Prince for a rare man; The Prince in sport said to him, I entertain

no Physician, vnlesse he have first killed thirty men. The Physician perceiving it was spoke merrily answered, And I am not far from that number. for I have already buried nine and twenty. Nay then, said the Prince, you are not for me, for I am afraid I must be the thirtieth man; The sayings are common, Non est bonus Medicus, nisi qui impleverit coemiterium, and Res misera Medicus, cvi nunquam bene est, nifimale sit quamplurimis.
         
         
            XXII.
            The former story may be feigned, but in history it is recorded concerning one Reuda (or Reuder or Reuther) a Scotch King, who would never suffer any young Physcian to begin their practice in his own Kingdom, nor admit them at home till after twenty years experience in his enemies countreys.
         
         
            
            XXIII.
            Asclepiades they say, made a bargain with Fortune, that he should not be trusted for a Physician, if he were ever sick himselfe. He was happy man if he kept his bargain. But there was a bargain among the Goths, the Patient was obliged afore-hand to pay the summe agreed on, and the Physician was obliged to the cure, or else to lose his Physick and his pains.
         
         
            XXIV.
            Heraclitus being sick examined his Physician concerning the cause of his sicknesse; but finding that he was ignorant and did faulter, he would take none of his Physick saying, If he be not able to shew me the cause, he is lesse able to take away the cause of my disease▪
         
         
            
            XXV.
            There was a Gentleman fell very sick; and a Friend of his said to him, Sir, you are in danger, I pray send for a Physician. But the sick man answered, It is no matter, for if I dye, I will dye at leisure. Perhaps some such conceit as this stuck in the Gentlemans head, Vis magno tibi precio mortem emere? Medicum Negotiatorem vitae consule.
         
         
            XXVI.
            There is a grave Authour that writes jests of Scholars (but such as were bred in Gotam College) He brings in a Scholar meeting his Physician and saying to him, I pray Sir pardon me; and be not angry that I have not been sick of late. Democritus thinks not this, as the Authour seems to deliver it, to be spoken simply, but with an eye to that saying, Medicus est nullus, si bene circumspicias,

qui amicos suos bene valere cupit. And Pausanias had some such like consideration, who when his Physician met him and said, I am glad to see you in good health, Pausanias answered, That comes to passe, because I have made no use of you; Now to these Democritus hath a ready answer in behalf of his Friends the Physicians.
            
               Gaudeo quod valeas, Medici vix credis ab ore?
               Hoc agit, ut valeas; quod meliusque facit.
            
         
         
            XXVII.
            And so where Democritus findes in another (who for the tryall of his wit writes against Learning with a great deal of learning) an objection against Physicians, that in the Countrey there is health where there are no Physicians, but in Cities where are most Physicians there are most sick: Democritus thinks his words mis-placed, and that he should say,

In the Countrey where there is health, there are no Physicians, but in Cities where there are most sick, there are most Physicians, which will be no disparagement, that they live most where they are most usefull and needfull.
         
         
            XXVIII.
            Aeneas Sylvius (who was after Pope Pius) being near his death, and the Physicians giving him hopes of life and recovery, said, This is the misery of great persons, that even in death they do not want Flatterers. But to this there is an Answer framed, that they who are to be the means of life love not to be the Messengers of Death.
         
         
            XXIX.
            One Baccius a Physician in Florence, who was able enough, but he had a worm in his pate, was sent for to the curing of a Woman; where feeling her Pulse, and looking upon her, he asked her, How old she was;

She told him, Threescore and three, at which speech he flung aside her arm, and gat him gone saying, Why how long would you live in this world? Perhaps the Climactericall year, which is another crotchet, was in his head.
         
         
            XXX.
            Cardan tels of one that had such a Receipt as would suddenly and certainly dissolve the stone in the bladder; and he concludes of him, that he makes no doubt but that he is now in hell, because he never reveal'd it to any one before he dyed; A hard Physician and an hard sentence; But this is pressed home by Philaretus, and it is to be wished that as there is the charitable Apothecary, so there were also the charitable Physician, for known diseases; for most of them, not only the Ague are Medicorum opprobria.
         
         
            
            XXXI.
            King James saith, that the Art of Physicians is very imperfect, for I doubt not, saith he, but for every disease there is in Nature a severall simple, if they could finde it out. So that their Compounds do rather show their ignorance than their knowledge. It is too true, that not only their affectations and contradictions in compositions leave men in a Wood, but their ascribing of a multitude of vertues to simples confound the true ones.
         
         
            XXXII.
            It is a great Question what does the cure, the Vulgar will tell you the last thing they took did the cure, as the last thing they did caused the disease; Some Physician will ascribe it to the rarity and dearnesse, others to the variety and composition, others to the fitnesse and order, &c. others think it is not the Physick or

Physician, but Nature being disburthened returns to her functions by degrees, and men from weaknesse to a more cheerfull condition, from a long hunger to a more greedy appetite, &c. And some adde, that it is not Nature but the God of Nature which heals us, and as the Proverb is, God heals, and the Physician hath the thanks. It is Gods compassion on the poor man who contemneth no means but is without any. It is the reward of his patience▪ It is Gods seeing his tears, or hearing his or the Churches prayers for him, It is Gods respect to the sick mans devotion, and good use he makes of his sicknesse whereby he recovers more health both in body and soul: This it is, though unobserved, that cures thousands, without means, or with what means soever they have about them.
         
         
            
            XXXIII.
            It is written and reported from an Authour of credit, That an ancient woman having an infirmity fallen in her eyes, which she could not be rid of by any remedy, spoke to a Scholar who used her house for some help; He in hope of some gain from her, told her he had an excellent charm for that disease. He takes therefore a peece of Paper, writes in it a company of strange characters (for omne ignotum pro magnifico) and in the end in great Letters, Daemon eruat oculos huic vetulae, & foramina stercoribus repleat. This Paper he seals wraps in silk, gives it to the old woman to hang about her neck, with a charge it should not be read or opened by any, for fear of blindenesse or a worse disease. The woman beleeves him, and observes his commands; And a while after, the Disease falling away, whether by natural causes or by the devils help, to confirm

her in her vain beleef of charms, she is recovered to her former clearnesse and strength of eye-sight, Fides sit penes Authorem, but my Authour addes withall, that without question the devil doth use such arts to abuse the simpler sort (for such Arts have no warrant from God, nor do they savour of man, being irrational, without art or industry.
         
         
            XXXIV.
            A Wizard fortetold William the Conquerour that he should fafely arrive in England with his whole Army, without any losse; which coming to passe (as the one or the other of two must be true) the King sent to confer with this Wizard. But when it was found and told him, that he was drowned in that Ship, which only of all the whole Fleet miscarried, the Conquerour▪ said, He would never make account of that Science which profited more the ignorant than the Masters of the profession, for he

could foresee my good fortune but not his own mishap.
            Another Story we have of our Henry the seventh who asked one of these Star-gazers (who had before prophesied of his death, as Culpepper did of the now King of France, who lives to pisse upon his grave) this Question, What shall betide me this Christmas? The cunning man answered, he could not tell; What then I pray thee shall become of thee? quoth the King, That likewise he said, he could not tell; Well then, said the King, I am more learned than thy self, for I know that thou shalt be committed to prison, and there keep thy Christmas for a jugling Companion.
         
         
            XXXV.
            Antonius Puccius, being in Embassage to Philip Duke of Millain, much given to Astrology, could not get audience a long time; At last, the Dukes Astrologer advising him of a fit time, the Embassadour was called upon to deliver his message, who refused

to come, saying, If the Horoscope did favour the Duke at that time, it did not favour him.
         
         
            XXXVI.
            In the time of the Councel at Constance, Peter de Monte Alcino a famous Astrologer prophesied, that Sigismund of Austria should that year be crowned Emperour by the Pope, and that John the 23, Pope should return with honour into Italy; But John being deposed by the Fathers of that Councell, and Sigismund not coming into Italy that year, the Astrologer was upbraided by one for telling such grosse lyes, who answered, It was no wonder, that being to make judgement of two fools, he was mistaken. The Astrologer was wise, for fools it may be will not be rul'd by the stars; nor perhaps wise men neither; for they say, Sapiens dominabitur Astris.
         
         
            
            XXXVII.
            A skillfull Astrologer (that is, one that knows and beleeves more fooleries than others) told Gardinal Pool, that he had very exactly calculated his Nativity, and found that great matters were portended of him (as that he should be Pope▪ &c.) the Cardinall answered, Perhaps it may be as you say, but you must remember that I was born again by Baptism, and that day of Nativity wherein I was born again, doth Eclipse the other before, If it were true that the Hour of our Nativity did discover the issues of our Nature, yet Custome and Education doth alter Nature, much more grace.
         
         
            XXXVIII.
            Henry the Second returning out of Ireland arriv'd at S. Davids in Wales, where it was told him, that according to Merlins prophecy, the Conqueror of Ireland returning that way

should dye upon a stone (called Lechlaver neer the Churchyard: whereupon in a great presence he passed over it, and said, Now who will hereafter credit that liar Merlin?
         
         
            XXXIX.
            Two Women being fallen out and giving one another the lye, to do it (as they thought handsomely, the one said, Thou lyest like our Town-Clock, which will be telling lyes upon Sundayes; And, said the other, thou lyest like an Almanack-Maker, that lyes all the year, and every day in the year. Nay, Democritus is bold and addes, that an Astrologer lyes when he tells truth.
         
         
            XL.
            William The Conqueror invading this Land chanc'd at his arrival to be gravelled, and he fell, his feet sticking fast in the sand. One of his Attendants caught him by the arme and

helped him up, saying, Stand up my Liege-Lord, and be of good cheer, for now you have taken fast footing in England. And then espying that He brought up sand and earth in his hand, he added, Yea and you have taken livery and seisin of the Countrey. It is as good to interpret an omen in the better as in the worse part; and as Seneca (not a Stoick in this) speaks very comfortably; Cum incerta sint speranda ac timenda, tibi fave, & crede quod mavis.
         
         
            XLI.
            That Omen or Luck is a word which signifies nothing, there are two noted instances from Heathens, where Fortune reign'd. An Owle (Infaelix Bubo, dirum mortalibus Omen) pitched upon Pyrrhus his spear as he went out to warre, and a tile thrown down upon his head piece by an old woman killed him. And an Owle lighted on Hierons spear when he went out to battel, and he got the victory. A Snake (O fearful!)

came out of a wooden pillar, when Tarquinius Superbus was destroyed by Brutus: And a Snake (O good!) slipt out of the Altar, as Sylla was sacrificing, and He (by the Augurs advice too) led forth his Army and overcame the Samnites, which victory was the foundation of his greatness. They say some Snakes have forked tongues, and this sure was one of them.
         
         
            XLII.
            My Lord Verulam in his collection of Apophthegmes relates this English story of Sr. Edward Dyer a grave and wise Gentleman, who yet did much believe in one Kelley an Alchymist, that he did indeed the work and made gold. Insomuch as he went himselfe into Germany, where Kelly then was, to informe himself fully thereof: After his return, he dined with my Lord of Canterbury, where at that time was at the Table D. Brown the Physician. They fell in talk of Kelley, Sr. Edward

Dyer turning to the Arch▪Bishop said; I doe assure your Grace, that what I shall tell you is truth, I am an eye-witness thereof, and if I had not seen it, I would not have believed it. I saw Master Kelly put off the base metal into the chrucible, and after it was set a little upon the fire, and a very small quantity of the Medicine put in, and stirred with a stick of wood, it came forth in great proportion, perfect Gold, to the Touch, to the Hammer, to the Test. The Bishop to this said, You had need take heed what you say, Sr. Edward Dyer, for here is an infidel at the Board. Sir, Edward said again pleasantly, I would have lookt for an Infidel sooner in any place than at your graces Table. What say you D. Browne? saith the Bishop, D. Browne answered after a blunt manner, The Gentleman hath spoken enough for me. Why (saith the Arch-Bishop) what hath he said? Mary (saith D. Browne) he said, he would not have beleeved it except he had seen it; And no more will I.
         
         
            
            XLIII.
            Democritus is much taken with Pope Leo the tenth (hold your censure till you know why it is) for rewarding an Alchymist. One of those Professors had dedicated a Book to the Pope of the Art of making gold. He looked for a great reward, and waited on the Pope daily. The Pope at last when he had sufficiently prolonged and enlarged his expectation, brought him out a large purse, and gave him; that since himself had the Art to make gold, there was a place for him to put it in. Alchymists first brag, and then cheat, and at last go a begging.
         
         
            XLIV.
            There are elsewhere to be found two or three words concerning Orators, which should here have had their place. The next to them are Poets, and as my Lord of Essex asked Sir Henry Savill What he thought

of Poets? that Learned Knight answered him, That he thought them the best Writers next to them that wrote Prose. And some of them are good men too, such as do not worship Hethen Gods, and sacrifice their wits to Mars, Venus, or Bacchus, or idolize themselves by Romances and Whimzes.
         
         
            XLV.
            Miltiades, a famous Athenian Souldier, being asked, Whether it were more honour to be Achilles or Homer? answered, That was such a question as to ask, Whether it were more Honour to be a Commander or a Trumpetter.
         
         
            XLVI.
            One Andreas Maro, who, like our Kendall for his extemporary verfifying was famous, and got in Rome the name of Archipoeta, was invited by Leo the tenth, who himself was poeticall, where the Pope telling

him he had heard of his great faculty and facility in verse, He presently in a glorying manner said,

                  Archipoeta facit versus pro mille Poetis.
                  To whom the Pope as suddenly replies,
                  Et pro mille aliis Archipoeta bibit.
               
            
         
         
            XLVII.
            One Eobanus Hessus a great Wit, and a good Poet, was once with a Nobleman Gualter by Name, He being to go abroad and ready to take Horse, said to the Poet, that he would give him a couple of Oxen, if he would make him a Verse before he got into the Saddle, whereupon Eobanus came out readily with this Verse,

                  Ascendat Gualter, veniat bos unus & alter.
               
And the Nobleman after his return was a Nobleman still, and as good as hi word.
         
         
            
            XLVIII.
            One Marius of Laudia, was showing Pope Clement the eighth a Copy of his verses, the Pope within three Verses findes a fault, and cries out, O Mark, here is a syllable too short; Mark answers him, It is no matter for that, your Holinesse by and by will finde another too long. This may be but in jest, but there is another in earnest, which makes a Rime against Rime, which holds against Verse too.
            
               Rime the rack of finest wits,
               That expresseth but by fits
               True conceit;
               Spoiling senses of their treasure,
               Cousening judgement with a measure,
               But false weight;
               Wresting words from their true calling,
               Propping verse for fear of falling
               To the ground;
               
                  
Joynting syllables, drowning letters,
               Fastening vowels, as with fetters
               They were bound, &c.
            
         
         
            XLIX.
            A Musician and a Poet met at a victualing house, where claiming kindred with a curse upon that Courtier that said they wanted brains, they must dine together, and bespoke a Calves head, which was a dainty. The man provides them their dinner, but noting their discourse, serv'd it in without the brains; Why what is here? said one of them, It is, said the Host, a Musician and a Poet; But he should have brought it in, for if they wanted, they had the more need of brains.
         
         
            L.
            In a meeting of severall Poets, one was reckoning up the severall sorts of them, the Comici, Tragici, Epici, Elegiaci, Lyrici, &c. Stephanus Ferrarius

said, I wonder you have left out the most ordinary and most common sort of Poets: Why said the other, who are they? Ferrarius answers, the Famelici. Studium quid inutile tendis? To which purpose, sure it is, that the Fable was made of the Gnats which in winter came a begging to the Bees, promising to teach their Children to sing, but the Bees answered, that their Children had learned a Trade already which would keep them from begging or starving in Winter: Poesis vitae umbratilis & delicatae accessio, said Tully, Poets, like gnats cannot live but in Sunny dayes.
         
         
            LI.
            But they will say, Other Scholars go a begging; They need not, if they will take Dionysius his course, who being not suffered to govern men, got a command over children, or if at lowest they will take the advice of the Propheticall Ballad made by a Vates indeed, if they will draw

their Indenture, and be bound at adventure an Apprentice to a free School. But though Democritus doth not like begging, studying to deserve better, yet praestat pudere quàm pigere; and in cases of necessity Scholars may not be denied that which is free for all men, for to appeal and to beg, is every ones priviledge.
         
         
            LII.
            One Mauritius born of mean parentage, and forced to get his living by Alms and Begging, followed his Book at School so diligently, that his School-fellows would in mockery call him Bishop of Paris, which name he being noted by, when he begged, some would offer him liberally, upon condition he would promise never to be Bishop of Paris; But he gallantly would refuse every proffer upon those terms: Which thing was generally laugh'd at, but in time it prov'd a presage, for he was after advanc'd to be Bishop of Paris indeed
         
         
            
            LIII.
            A Scholar in his travels being rob'd (and he that robs a Scholar, they say, robs more then one) came to Cosmus Medices begging something of him; Cosmus ask'd him how he became so ragged and out of fashion in his clothes; The Scholar told him he was rob'd by the way of his money and clothes; Yes, saith Cosmus, thou hast been rob'd, but perhaps by gaming rather; It is true, said the Scholar, by Fortunes great game, whereby she takes from me, and gives to such as you. Cosmus finding him a Scholar, put him in handsome clothes, and furnished him with money for his journey. This and divers other instances which might be set down, confirms what one of▪ the Philosophers said, who being asked, What a wise man differed from a fool? answered, Send them both naked to those that knw them not, and you shall perceive.
         
         
            
            LIV.
            The Philosophers, as we have said, used to go a begging, and they have handsome Apologies for it. Diogenes being asked in scorn; What the reason was that Philosophers haunted rich men and not rich men Philosophers? he answers, Because the one knew what they wanted, the other did not; and one saying to Aristippus, Why should men rather give to the poor then to Philosophers? He auswers, Because they think themselves may sooner come to be poor then to be Philosophers. The same Aristippus would say, that He took money of his Friends, not so much to use it himself, as to teach them how to bestow their money. The same Philosopher▪ once begging a good summe of money of Dionysius King of Sicily, The King said to him, Why dost thou Aristippus beg that which you Philosophers make show as if you did despise, and say that a wise man hath no need of? Aristippus replies, Give

me the money first, and then I will give you an answer to your question; Dionysius gives him the money, And now, saith Aristippus, do not you see that I have no need of what you talk of? and and so our doctrine and my practice agrees well enough.
         
         
            LV.
            Aeschines perceiving every one give Socrates something for a present, said unto him, Because I have nothing else to give, I will give thee my self. Do so, said Socrates, and I will give thee back again to thy self better then when I received thee.
         
         
            LVI.
            Antigonus seeing Cleanthes a Learned Philosopher helping a Baker to grinde corn at the Mill, said unto him, Molis tu Cleanthe? What Cleanthes dost thou grinde Corn? I, sayes he, I do so, or else I must starve for want of bread. And many there are who

are forc'd to serve Tables, their own Table, who are fitter for better service. And perhaps Democritus is Mendicus hodiernus, and, though he could write something else, writes this first, to put meat in his mouth.
         
         
            LVII.
            For all this Democritus loves not to goe a begging; with him Verecundum est rogo dicere. Yet He loves and thinks a Scholars part Saepe rogare. For old Democritus hath told him, that Veritas est in puteis & fodinis, and he knows then, that it is the curious and inquisitive man that must digge and draw it out of the deep. He is therefore , one of the Seekers, for He hath found by experience that Quaestio (quaesitio) res est quaestusa; qui quaerit & non quaesita invenit. He that asks of others that are able to informe him, & discit, & placet; He that asks▪ and seeks of himself finds very often more than he seeks for. Besides, Dulcior cibus ex venatu, and

Omne scientificum, quantò profundiùs quaeritur, tantò gloriosiùs invenitur. He that does scire per causam knows more certainly and most usefully. And therefore in ordinary and highway sentences, and common Schoolboy Theams, He lets them not passe without enquiry An sit? or Cur sit? To which purpose though Democritus knows the Scholar furnished with some problematical Books, as du Plessis, Camerarius and others, yet he thinks Tassonis Pensieri may be a stranger to many; and therefore having collected and compacted in brief some number out of his large Book, He will here bestow some few of them on the Scholar, choosing those which are the more pleasing and agreeable to the intent of this book, and leaving the more serious to his graver studies in the Library, if shops will not help him with the Authour.
         
         
            
            LVIII.
            Quary 1. ex L. 1. q. 10. & l. 3. q. 5. 8.
            Why Fire melts Lead and hardens Egges; melts Ice and hardens salt; melts Wax and hardens Clay.
            R. Fire melts Lead and other metals, because Metals in their principles are but watry and moist substances (I should think rather earthy and stony) congealed and condensed by the excesse of cold (N. B. not by concoction of heat, as vulgarly) which the fire vanquishing reduceth them to their originall (and so we see the waters that do saxifie and metallize plants or other things thrown into them are extreme cold.) And fire hardens Egges, because the thin waterish humour being quickly evaporated, the viscous and more tenacious humour remaining is easily dried and hardened. Salt and Ice have

both their principles from water, and Fire evaporates the more light and subtile part of Sea-water, and dries the more earthy which makes the salt; But Ice which is condensed by excessive cold retains the whole Humidity without any drinesse, wherefore the heat overcoming that cold reduceth it to his former state. The same reason holds, why the Sun hardens Clay and melts Wax, for Clay is nothing but earth altered by an adventitious moisture, which being consumed by the Sun, the Earth remains as it was naturally cold and dry; and Wax consisting of fatnesse and moisture united by cold, the heat of the fire or Sun dissolves the union, and so makes it liquid and diffusive, and so we see also in grease, tallow, or the like.
         
         
            
            LIX.
            L. 2. q. 10.
            Why the Heavens and the Sea appear of an azure colour.
            Colours (saith our Authour still) come from the predominancy of the four first qualities. As whitenesse comes from cold, and so congealed things turn white, as Tallow, Snow, Hayl, &c. and men in cold Countreys and women which are of a cold complexion have white skins, and flegme and spittle is therefore white, and old men grow white▪haired. Rednesse comes from heat, as we see in bloud, choler, and metals put into the fire. Blacknesse comes from the adustion of heat, and this we see in coale, melancholy, and smoak, which is but air and moisture adust. Green comes from moisture, as we see in grasse, herbs, and leaves of trees, and so we may call the colour of the water

being a moist body; and we have a colour called Sea-green; Azure hath some affinity and relation to green, as we finde those that dye green do first dip in blew, yet green hath more light and Azure more opacity; and so our eye looking to the skie sees the light by distance shadowed into blew: And therefore Painters to imitate Nature in representing their Landskips, paint their Mountains and places distant of a skie▪colour. Aristotle saith, that Azure is the colour of the Sea, and the skie hath it only by reflextion from the sea as in a glasse, but if so, then in great Continents the skie should appear of another colour.
         
         
            LX.
            L. 5. q. 13.
            Why green delights the sight.
            1. Because it consists in a more entire proportion betwixt black and

white then other middle colours.
            2. Because it is the colour our sight is accustomed to in grasse, leaves, &c. (and that in the most pleasant season, when the air is most welcome, neither too hot nor too cold; when the Spring and youth of all things please us, &c. and so it delights us not only by sense, but by memory reflecting on its concomitants, as some musick though none of the best, delights more by remembrance of our youthfull dayes and company.)
            3. Because the eye being an Organ full of moisture, is by sympathy, as the taste also, delighted with that colour which ariseth from moisture, and offended with the fire and Sun by reason of the drynesse.
            This our Authour saith holds, except in a Gentle womans face, where green (if it may be called so) pleaseth not.
         
         
            
            LXI. L. 5. q. 16.
            Why smoak offends the eyes.
            For the reason before, the moisture of the eye, and the drynesse of smoak, which is seen in preservation of Meats from putrefaction by smoke.
            From the moisture of the Eyes it is, that those that have a good sight have not so good a smell, because the sight requires cold and moist, the smell hot and dry; and for this is Fishing good for the eyes, because of the moist ambient air by the Rivers side. The vapour of an Onyon will extract tears and not pepper; and therefore not only because of its Acrimony, but because of the adjoyned tenaciousnesse and viscosity in the vapour of the Onyon. (But whereas our Authour saith, it offends the eyes and not other parts, he did not consider, that though the eye because of its porosity and tendernesse be much offended, yet the brain also, and the

lungs are offended, and that to the hindrance of study or speaking, and if it continue, to the danger of health.)
         
         
            LXII. L. 4. q. 3.
            Whether a man receives more pleasure or displeasure from the sense of smelling?
            Smell is given to unreasonable creatures in such perfection, as they can do many things by it, which men do by discourse. As particularly Dogs, which by smell only know their Masters, will finde them out in the night, and track them at the greatest distance: Nay, they will not only smell out Beasts and Birds that are hid, but they will pick a stone out of the bottome of the water, which hath been thrown after them, which seems a dull thing and not to yield any scent at all. But man serving himself by discourse hath this sense more remisse, not much at hand, and that little rather for rellish then necessity, for a man may live without perfumes or

flowers Indeed meats, when they have an aromaticall taste conformable to their Nature, rellish the sweeter; as Wines, Fruits, Rostmeat, and other viands: But on the other side, unsavoury and rotten meats are much more nauseous to the stomack and offensive to the brain. Besides, all meas breed such excrements as man cannot endure. And further, the heaps of dirt, dregs, dunghils, &c. are not only noysome but pestileniall. Nay, many wholsome things are lothsome, as lillies, Brimstone, Physical drugs, &c. Now this happens not to other creatures; Smels, 'tis true, they will discern at more distance, but bad smels offend them not at hand, except in what is their own food. Wherefore men that have a bad scent or have lost their smell, have the lesse cause to be grieved for it, because there are so many more bad smels then good ones. (Yea, and what my L. Verulam observes, Men have lost their life by bad smels, which no good smels have

power to recover.) Yet to recompence this, Those that have a good smell have a good wit also, as Cardan observes, Quoniam calida & sicca cerebri temperies olfactu praestat, talis verò ad imaginandum prompta ob caliditatem, & imaginum tenax est ob siccitatem▪ Neither is that true, which the Ancients observe, that man hath the most imperfect smell; for though he smell not at such a distance▪ yet he discerns more species and differences of smels; other creatures breathing the ayr of no odoriferous things but such only as serve them for food.
         
         
            LXIII. L. 4. q. 9.
            Why Marble sweats.
            1. Scaliger saith, because those stones come out of waters, and therefore steal the moist ayre which is connaturall to them, which the heat of the Ayre concocting turns into drops.
            2. But this comes to passe, because

those moist vapours occasioned by the South-winde in close places, as Churches, Cloysters, &c. where Marble is, cannot pierce the Marble as other porose bodies, and so making stay upon the stone are by its coldnesse condensed into drops. The same we see in wainscoat being more close and solid then other wood, and in smooth glasses if filled with cold water. Iron and Marble in open ayre have rather a dew then drops, because of the plenty of attenuated and loose moisture, and the breathing of the Ayre which disperseth it, and the inclination of the water to seek communion and fellowship; whereas in dry places, as in dust, upon a Table, on dry Marble, water will rowle it self into little heaps, to unite and preserve it self against its enemy drynesse. And this is the reason of the roundnesse of drops, and not that common one, that water doth it to conform it self with the rotundity of the great masse of waters, which cannot be said to be round but as

conjoyned with the masse of the earth, both which do but make one globe.
         
         
            LXIV. L. 4. q. 15.
            Why Oyle swims above water.
            1. Aristotle saith, Because of its mixture with Ayre, and so Plutarch, Quòd de reliquis humidis maxime pellucidum est Oleum, quia in se plurimum habet Aeris. This we see in Ice, which because of its mixture with Ayre is more transparent.
            2. Another reason is, because it is hot and full of spirits, as we see it will quickly take flame, which water will not; and therefore is it lighter, as we finde, the same vessell weighs more filled with water then with oyle.
            Although Oyle being hot will sooner congeal then vinegar or water; yet that is not properly a freezing of Oyle, but only a more ready condensation of it: for Oyle being of it self a juyce of a condensed substance, as

it will be easily dissolved by a tepedity of Ayre, because of its own inward cooperating heat; so a little help of cold makes it return to his first originall.
         
         
            LXV. L. 4. q. 21.
            Why men are sick at Sea, and not on Rivers.
            1. Plutarch attributes this to the smell of the Sea-waters, and to the fear of those that use not the Sea; for those that are usually upon the Sea will not vomit.
            2. It is probable upon experience, that it is from the Agitation and tossing of the Sea; and so it will fall out in the outlets of Rivers; because a circular and confused motion is most repugnant to mans naturall motion which is erect and distinct; And therefore turning round also will turn a mans stomack; For the spirits being stirred, make the meat boyl on the stomack, and so lift it up to disgorge it self.
         
         
            
            LXVI. L. 5. q. 4.
            In what tongue a Childe kept by himself would speak▪
            Not in Hebrew, for deaf men speak not Hebrew; nor in any other language; But the tongue being for mutuall commerce and entercourse; if a dozen were bred up together wihtout hearing any others, they would when they came to understanding make a Language of their own; and so in infinitum, so many more so many new Languages.
         
         
            LXVII. L. 5. q. 7.
            Why man on his Head is more hairy than other Creatures.
            1. The excrementitious part of food is in others spent in Teeth and Horns, as Arostotle saith, and in man it is necessary as in other things, that Pilosity should follow the moisture of the brain.
            
               
2. Hair is Natures Fringe and fence against Heat and Cold; and in man, because he goes upright, it is his cover, which in Beasts that are crooked is no more necessary then on the other parts.
         
         
            LXVIII. L. 5. q. 16.
            Whether is it worse to be blinde or deaf.
            The blinde have a great infelicity, being unapt for action, and exposed to the injuries of the world; besides the very seeing is delightful; and the sight, as Cardan, is Sensus nobilissimus, quòd procul magis, & plura, & exquisitiùs, & celeriùs, & sub pluribus differentiis decernit. But to be born deaf is certainly worse, for besides that with it they lose their tongue also, they can know nothing of God and goodnesse but by natural instinct and so are in the confines betwixt men and beasts. And the blinde are but only debarred corporall actions, not intellectuall; So that we see divers

blinde men Scholars, but none deaf:) yet the deaf and dumb man hath a late worthy Friend M. Bulwer, who laboureth, hopeth, and almost promiseth to make him hear by the Eye, and thence to speak also; a rare and noble attempt, and a miracle of Art; to which purpose Democritus hath seen cited the Title of the Spanish Authour in M. Merick Casaubons Tract of Enthusiasme, and whether the work be in that learned mans custody he cannot say.)
         
         
            LXIX. L. 5. q. 17.
            Why Man doth not see in the night as well as some other creatures.
            Because the eye of man is black, and so is darknesse: and therefore the Organ and object confounding the fancy, it cannot apprehend because it must gather by diversity: And therefore those that have white Eyes will be sooner snowblinde, and can see better than others

in the night; and Cats and Owls eyes are yellowish and resemble the light, and therefore they see better in the dark. The reason why an Eagle can look upon the Sun (if she do so) must be because the Sun is an object too violent for us; but the spirits of the Eagle are more intense and united, having but only a Chrystalline humour, but perhaps it is her brows cover her eyes, so that she doth but seem to look upon it.
         
         
            LXX. L. 5. q. 25.
            Why Man and a Capon have the Gowt.
            Because the Gout being a biting viscous humour, residing in the nerves; the soft and rich and lazy are generally troubled with it; and therefore a Capon not living abroad as other birds (but especially if he be coop'd) and his complexion being like mans hot and moist, he will have the Gout; but so likewise will dogs

that Ladyes keep, and horses that stand in stables, The reason why women have not the Gout so much as men is, because their humonrs are more fluid and more easie to be discharged.
         
         
            LXXI. L. 5. q. 27.
            What creature is most like man.
            In respect of Figure the Ape (who though is not therefore, as our Authour, cal'd Simia quia similis, but à simo naso in quo nobis est dissimilis) But in respect of manners and community the Bee. For the Bee is a sociable creature, observing her times, living under cover, burying her dead, not without her Queen, & being multiplyed, sending out her colonies and swarms for a new Plantation, &c. (And who so is in love with the sweet and cheap fruits of this industrious creature, may consult, besides our worthy M. Butler, the works of that publique friend of men (and

of Democritus also) M. Samuell Hartlib.
         
         
            LXXII. L. 5. q. 28.
            What Creature next to man, may be called the happiest.
            The Crow exceeds all, if we consider this earthly happinesse to consist in long life and content. Her flesh is not desired for food, no Nets or Gins are set for her. She her self can feed upon any carion (and no carion will kill a Crow.) She never wants being omnivora; upon mountains, in the champain, on the sands she will finde pasture; She cares not for heat, or cold, she will live in the Sun, in frost, in the snow, and if rain be coming, she will call for it. There is not a Bird more hardy, or carelesse, or bold, or cunning then she. (Therefore those that are discontented, that they have not their portion in this life, and fall to wishing themselves some a sheep, &c. may do wisely in their next thoughts to wish themselves a crow.)
         
         
            
            LXXIII. L, 5. q. 29.
            Which is the most cruell creature.
            Man; for Birds and Beasts of prey are but petry single Robbers, there are not among them Herds and Armies of Murtherers. Other Creatures kill not except famished or provoked. Man will kill any other creature (this is granted him) but more, He will kill those of his own kinde, not as Fishes out of necessity of food, or as other beasts in their own defence, but to satisfie his revenge, suspicion, Ambition; as they say, Cannibals feed upon mans flesh to please their palate; He will kill a woman which no other creature will do. He will kill his Domestiques, even Parents and Children, which no Creatures in flocks and companies offer to do.
         
         
            
            LXXIV. L. 5. q. 34.
            Why a Dog will turn round before he lye down, is not to stay for you till you fetch him a cushion, but to unite his heat; as he will also lye along when he is hot, and Serpents do the like; and as we in bed gather our selves close in winter, and stretch our selves out in summer; Why a dog will run up and down a Field, or by the banks of a River, is, because being a Creature inclined to coursing, he chuseth such fit places; and when he perceives he is for hunting, he will empty himself, and rub upon the ground, to quicken and make himself the more nimble and active: Why a Dog will rub Carrion with neck or head before he taste it is, because he would lighten the offensive smell, that he might make it his meat. This our Fancy and Understanding doth in the contemplation of horrid and filthy objects, wherein our lusts and longings

do tempt, but our reason and Conscience check us.
         
         
            LXXV. L. 5. q. 44.
            Whether the life of Diogenes is to be commended or condemned.
            Alexander would have been Diogenes And these Cynicks seem to reduce Nature to its primitive purity, without art or ornament, retired from the senses, contemning delights, and not distinguishing betwixt man and man.
            But man being a reasonable, sociable, and cleanly creature, to be beneficial to Parents, Children, Countrey, Friends, &c. and serviceable for the publike good: It is not the part of a man but a Dog to bark at humanity and its offices, or rather the character of a Serpent the mortall enemy of mankinde. Not to labour for any others by any burthen or employment, and yet proudly to scorn all others; to live sordidly in rags, to let his hair

and nails grow; to lye in his own dung under no cover but a Tub, to make no difference of meat raw or rosted, to eat lice and drink with his mouth at a ditch, to stink to himself and others, is rather the property of an hog, then a dog, which is far more cleanly.
         
         
            LXXVI. L. 6.
            Why Children contrary to old men abound in memory, and fail in their understanding.
            1. Because the matter of the brain in youth is more moist and tender, and so more apt and pliable to receive the impressions and phantasmes of the imaginative part, on the other side in Age it it is dry, which drynesse attenuates and subtilizeth the wit, but withall makes old men to fail in Memory.
            2. Besides the memory of young men is as a white pure paper untoucht with Impressions, which makes it

not so dull and confused with other Notions, as in old men.
            3. Further, youth applyes its fancy to observe and to furnish it self with knowledge, and therefore imprints things with greater force.
            This is not intended of meer Children, whose memories are too fluid to retain, but of Children begun to collect, reason and discourse.
         
         
            LXXVII.
            Why understanding men use to falter in Reading or Writing.
            It is, because as the senses may be slow, so the Fancy is most quick in intelligent men, and therefore out of the curiosity and anxiety of coming to the summe and period of what they intend, they neglect circumstantials in reading, writing, or speaking, and therefore they reade false, write and speak short, and by a multitude of Figures.
         
         
            
            LXXVIII.
            Why acute wits are not staid and stable.
            1. Because of the vivacity and subtlety of their spirits, which is an enemy to setlednesse and gravity.
            2. Because of their curiosity in difficulties and novelties, which do not still occurre.
            (These wits in Colleges they say have a Worm, perhaps from that phrase in Seneca,—cerebri aestuantis verminationes. And it is true, that Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae, There is no witwithout a worm, but when this worm is fed, and grows as big as an Ele or a Conger, then it makes an Heteroclite, an extravagant Capriccio, and an affectator, who is an extraordinary man in ordinary matters.)
         
         
            
            LXXIX.
            Why men are the wisest creatures.
            Not because they have the least heads, as Aristotle saith, which is false, 1. In it self, for proportionably to the rest of the parts man hath the greatest head, and 2. in the reason, for the greatest brains have the greatest wits; and therefore dogs and horses, and Elephants, which have greater brains, are the more docile and intelligent. But it is
            1. In respect of the whole temperature of the body, which is far more exact in him then in other creatures.
            2. In respect of the particular temper of his brain, which consists in cold and dry, whence is the goodnesse and subtlety of discursive spirits.
            3. In respect of the Quantity of the Brain, which proportionably exceeding all other creatures leaves more room for the soul wherein to

exercise its operations (and therefore he made but a fallacy who argued, that great heads had the lesse wit, because Omne majus continet in se minus, for he spoke not ad idem.)
            4. In respect of the Perieranium, which being but thin and little, doth not oppresse and blunt the more subtle and spirited parts with grosse and superfluous matter.
         
         
            LXXX.
            Why wisedome in youth is odious.
            1. Because wisedom being the pretogative of Age, and jests and toys all that is expected from youth; Precocity as in Joseph, is counted a presumption, to equall age, and outgoe their fellows in youth.
            2. Because it is premature, preventing Natures course, and being not digested and setled by experience, is rather to be called wit then wisedom. (It is indeed miraculous, and

modesty makes it amiable, which graceth Gifts, and covereth infirmities. But in some places Mushromes are accounted Dainties, and the Goslings carry the Geese to watering.)
         
         
            LXXXI.
            Why some men that can reason well are not for practise.
            1. The reason in Politiques is, because men can spy out with ease what will be found hard to be put in execntion, the reason of such pretenders and promisers consists in Idea's, Chimera's, curiosities and impossibilities, not aimed at and unfit for action, and by the pomp of their words they would set out themselves by slieghting the most difficult and desperate enterprizes.
            2. In Ethicks, vicious persons talk Stoically of vertue, as it is in his excellency and exaltation; without reflecting upon themselves or relation to practice; but only to please themselves

and others with the reputation and opinion of goodnesse.
         
         
            LXXXII.
            Why learned men are more timerous then the ignorant.
            1. Because of the abundance of heat and bloud in the simpler sort, which makes them more bold, and is wanting in the temper of wisemen.
            2. Because the Learned live a sedentary life, far from dangers, wherein custome doth harden the other.
            3. Because wise men are quick to foresee, and advised to consider the greatnesse of a danger; whereas they who know them not, esteem them not, and so are more daring.
            4. Because they duely esteem the value of their life, not to be cast away upon trifles, but reserved for a sacrifice. And whereas some hold it an argument of a generous and valiant minde to contemn a mans life;

the wise man thinks, that he that cares not for his life deserves it not; For life being the best naturall thing, none will despise it but a solemn fool, and they must confesse it little worth which they care not to lose, and therefore Aristippus said well, being taxed for timerousness in a storm, that there was oddes betwixt his life and the Boatmans.
         
         
            LXXXIII.
            Why mean men coming to Dignities and Preferments use to be prouder and lesse courteous then Noblemen or Gentlemen.
            It is true generally to a Proverb, that Honores mutant mores, and among many other there is a remarkable Story of the Son of Fabius being made Consul, who seeing his Father coming over the way sent him word, he must now honour him as Consul, and forget himself to be his Father. And this comes to passe

from the basenesse of such mens mindes, who remembring that in their meaner fortunes they handling others respectively were nevertheless neglected, they are now afraid the same should fall out; and therefore to tame their acquaintance, they must let them know they must not build upon their ancient familiarity. And so they use them homely, give them a cold salute, make as if they did not know them, look sowr, talk little and gravely, call them Goodman when they should Sir, make them stay at their Portals, &c. And to their own servants and Inferiours, they look angerly, out-brave and rate them, that all men may know they are no small Fools. But noble persons knowing they are such, and deserve respect, if not otherwise, yet for their Nobility, which is a desert of their Predecessors, deal more courteously; not so much to gain the good liking of others; but as knowing they deserve not to be vilified in the memory of any thing past, so

they fear not they shall be so used for the future.
         
         
            LXXXIIII.
            Why men in love are enclined to Poetry.
            1. Because love doth mollifie rough and fierce spirits, as fire doth iron: and therefore it may well make your soft, jocund and sparkling youths to be chanting.
            2. It seems to be a natural instinct, as we see in birds, when they are to breed fall a singing. And as the antient rude times to express Heroical and divine matters began in Poesy, so the lover to set out his his love, as he conceivs her, above the condition of Mortals▪ runs to this natural old form by verse and love-songs.
            3. Because the lover adorning and imbellishing his beloved with rings, jewels and bracelets, would adorn his conceits likewise with number, harmony, and mirth.
            4. Amorous passions excite men

more; and therefore dispose men also to daunce though they have no art.
            5. Because both love and Poetry are kinds of fury; and come from or send up hot spirits to the brain: and therefore also men a little mad or drunk will rime without study.
         
         
            LXXXV.
            Why Fables delight us, although we know they have no truth in them.
            Fables delight us, not as false, but as strange and like to truth, And so children love Fables more than men, because they apprehend them as true, and men love pictures and statues more then children, because they apprehend them as rare and artificial. For 1. out of curiosity our mind longs after rarities and novelties. And 2. the meer resemblance of truth doth abuse and force our fancy and understanding; insomuch as we love imitations also better than realities, as of

the gruntling of an Hog, and of grief and anger in players, which are ungrateful when they are natural.
         
         
            LXXXVI.
            Why honour being above riches, defamations are not so capital as damages.
            1. Aristotle saith, it is because there is a more natural impetuousness and precipitancy in the tongue, and more difficulty to bridle it, than to keep the hands from stealing which comes of choice and deliberation: but if so, those defamations which are advised and resolved should have a capital punishment.
            2. Because an injury in words is easie to be retorted, and if a man do not retort it, it is presumed he counts it no injury.
            3. He that abuseth another in language, is provoked by some at least seeming occasion: but the thief hath no provocation but from himself.
            
               
4. Although honour be more noble, yet a man may live without it; but without means a man cannot subsist in this world.
            5. A mans honour may be recovered by submissions, recantations, or fines; and for those real dishonours of incests, adulteries, &c. which are irrecoverable, they are capital. But stoln goods are so oft imbesled as there is no hope of restitution.
            6. Thefts and robberies bring more dammage to the publick: and the errors of the tongue are so easily committed, that lawgivers would not punish them with rigour.
         
         
            LXXXVII.
            Whether in learning the Ancients exceeded the modern.
            1. All beginnings are far from perfection; and are advanced and improved by experience and industry. But this holds not here; for learning and arts go not by a continued series

and succession, but sometimes increase and dilate themselves per saltum, sometimes fail in an instant. Sometimes they are increased by warlike and flourishing Nations. Crescit enim cum amplitudine rerum vis ingnii. Great rewards are to be found in a great state, which brings in a confluence of great wits: and so both in Greece and Rome Arts and Arms flourished both together, sometimes learning falls into the hands of barbarous and blockish Nations, which by wars and incursions extinguish it; as it happened to Italy in the decrepit-age of the Romane Empire overrun by the Goths and Vandales.
            2. It may be said in favour of the modern, that it is vitio malignitatis humanae, quod vetera in laude, praesentia in fastidio sint. Whether it be out of envy and emulation of competitors, which death for ancients hath overcome; or out of some natural instinct, we have to admire things Ancient (as we do in statues, coins, and reliques, buildings and nobility;)

or whether it is our daintinesse to prize those things we have not seen before those that are ordinarily presented unto us (and so likewise we admire strangers more then our own Countreymen) because we look upon things present with the imperfections they have, or such as Envy puts upon them; but in things ancient and distant their merits are aggravated, but their failings are concealed.
            This argument our Authour prosecutes through a whole tenth book, by instance and comparison of ancient and modern learned men of all sorts, whereof he handles the severals in so many several Chapters, and gives mostly the precedency to the modern.
         
         
            LXXXVIII.
            But Manum de Tabula. Here is an enough for an example and a taste, and to make the Scholar rise with an appetite to the Authour. And Democritus could produce much more

out of that Authours Treasury, and some grains of his own he hath to adde to the heap, if that were now his businesse. He now only shows how a Scholar looks upon these ordinary things with no ordinary eye; but withall searcheth either into the Truth of them; or the Cause, or the Use of them, yet before Democritus can get away from Scholars (as when he meets with them he is loth to depart) he knows they will be posing him concerning the subject he hath undertaken; and seeing this Tract consists of Apophthegmes and Proverbs, they will be trying his skill in the choice of them by an enquiry, whence it is that these come to have such vertue and value above other speeches. Wherefore let them put it to the question.
         
         
            
            LXXXIX.
            Why Apophthegmes do more move and affect others, then set and continued speeches.
            Democritus knowing them to be the most candid who are the most competent Judges (except in Criticks and Grammarians) desires the Scholar here to pause, and to frame to himself an answer to this before he reade further; and if he have forgot to do it in the former, yet hereafter to use to do it oftner in other Problemes, Objections, or Doubts; He shall by this whet his own judgement the more, and censure others works the lesse, perhaps like them the better. Democritus saith not this to avoid an answer, but to make way for an equall acceptance; The Answer is ready. Only it must be remembred what was said in the Epistle, there are some speciall affections to some Apophthegmes more then other, as

they are suitable to the Persons; and severall appetites according to the severall things amiable and discovered in the speech or speaker; and more or fewer approved according to the narrownesse or capacity of Readers or Hearers; whereas the Scholar or Traveller, who is a Citizen of the world and the Orbes of whose minde are concentr que to the Universe, accepts the most of them that have any vertue in them. And those generall vertues which set forth an Apophthegme either in the matter or form and frame of them, are such as these.
            1. The Plainnesse and Integrity, or (as it is called) Bluntnesse of speech; where men speak with their hearts, and not with their lips, and are ready to deliver truth however taken; or oppose those plausible insinuations by courtesies, flattery or dissimulation, for this upright down-right dealing, hath love or reverence from most men, even from those that care not to practise it.
            
               
2. Boldnesse and liberty, which hath the face of Integrity and plain-dealing, or sets a good face upon the speaker, the face of a victor and conquerour in a contestation: as one that is not awed by respect of persons, or not daunted by scorn and reprehensions, as a dog at a rating.
            3. A little more then boldnesse, Stoutnesse and Courage, Spirit and Metall manifested against more then verball, against reall terrours and menaces.
            4. Gentlenesse and Civility, in a courteous or fit proffer of a gift or counsell, in a modest casting back a commendation, in the respective blaming of a fault, or the fair evading of a pressing accusation, especially with recoyl upon the first speaker, when the ball is handsomely bandied, taken and returned to the others hazard and prejudice.
            5. In most, the Wit or the Wisedom, the acutenesse and clearnesse, or the weight and depth of the speech; when it argues the Speaker to see

through a popular fallacy, when it is pointed to pierce the matter in hand, and like a wedge makes clear way in expressing knotty difficulties and objections.
            These are the things materiall, which are effectuall and acceptable in an Apophthegm. Then next for the manner of the delivery, that which makes them the more delightful are,
            1. The trimming and facings of good Language.
            2. The kindenesse of the mirth and pleasantnesse.
            3. The Brevity and concisenesse, bringing things to an issue, delivering much in a little, discovering a man by a word, as a Picture in a Tablet.
            4. The Readinesse and quicknesse of the delivery, for to make such as these shews a wit at will, as we call it: a present wit, which slips not the first and fittest opportunities of speech.
            5. The rarity and unexpectednesse

of the speeches, when they prevent and exceed expectation, and like goads awaken and stir up attention, as sudden and strange stops or changes in musick make it the sweeter.
         
         
            XC.
            Concerning Proverbs, they are generally magnified as the vulgar Rhethorick and Philosophy▪ neither doth the Scholar despise them because common, for though the common people use them most, yet they proceeded at first from the mouths of men in esteem for wisedom and learning. And because the Scholar as yet hath not had his share of these, here are some few sorted according to the oer whereby their Vertues may be manifest. Of these some are Proverbiall rather then Proverbs, and perhaps properly only deserve the Name, all the rest being but the published sayings and sentences of witty men. Such of many are these.
            
               
               
                  A Friend at a sneeze
                  (the most thou canst get of him is, God help thee.)
                  Friers Charity
                   (to convey you as far as the door.)
                  He eats leaves and voids silk
                  (all things thrive with him.)
                  He may pisse in bed, and say he sweat,
                  (his name is up.)
                  Do good to your selves,
                  (the Italian beggars word.)
                  To go where the King cannot send an Embassadour
                  (to stool.)
               
            
         
         
            XCI.
            These Proverbs or Sentences are valuable by the choice and use of them in the Scholars hands. And he considers them either in consort or single: In consort, and so either in their conjunction or opposition: In conjunction with others of their kinde, and in order, of which there is a specimen or two elsewhere; and this for a stock and furniture of wisedome and goodnesse: for Solomons

wisedom had not been so great, unless it had been like the sand of the Sea, small in its portions and parcels, and therefore so great in the whole masse and bulk.
         
         
            XCII.
            But the Scholar doth more, and placeth within the same view those sentences or sayings that seem to oppose or cross one another, such as these,
            
               Qui fugit Legem, fatetur Facinus.
               Legem veretur Nocens, Fortunam
               Innocens.
               Ecquis Innocens esse potest, si accusâsse sat est?
               Si inficiari sufficiat, ecquis erit nocens?
               Nemo tam senex, qui non possit annum vivere.
               Nemo tam juvenis, qui non possit hodie mori.
               Ars longa, vita brevis.
               Non exiguum tempus habemus, sed multum perdimus.
               
                  
Rationale non est substantiam perdere propter Accidentia.
               Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
               Aliquae sunt injustè facienda, ut multa justè fieri possunt.
               Authorem praesentis justitiae habes, sponsorem futurae non habes.
               Aliud est, Bonum virum esse; aliud bonum esse civem.
            
            Sed quid fiet de Cive bono, cum Cacodaemones malum virum ad Inferos abripuerunt?
            
               Ʋnus vir, nullus vir.
               Ʋnus multorum instar.
               Mus non uni fidit antro.
               Multa novit vulpes, Echinus unum magnum.
               Plus vident Oculi, quam Oculus.
               He that hath but one eye sees the better for it.
               One Flower makes no Garland.
               One grain fils not the sack, but helps his fellows.
               I got it but now, and to lose it so quickly▪ Again▪
               
                  
I have kept it thus long, and now to lose it.
            
            Sidiu illud habuisti, perdis antequam satiat uses▪ si non diu, perdis antequam assuescas.
            
               Little pot soon hot.
               Soon hot soon cold.
               The first blow is as much as two,
               The second blow makes the fray.
               Charity begins at home,
               But it doth not end at home.
            
            And of such Sentences, which may seem to crosse, but do indeed set one another right, the Scholar findes many in his walks, some occasionally scattered, as in Seneca's Tragedies frequently, others purposely prosecuted, as in Posidippus and Metredorus old Epigrams of mans life, and in some late ingenious Essayes of Marriage, Platonick love, &c. but he hath a great example of them in the Antitheta of that great Advancer of Learning. And Democritus quamvis non passibus aequis, hath gone the same

way, and hath some store of these. And he thinks the Scholar, if he have not already, will finde it a way of good use and benefit; not for Grammaticall improper exercises of Declamations, nor for flashy and Rhetoricall uses for ostentation, as the old Orators and some late Lawyers, to shew a Scepticall faculty of discoursing on both sides: nor much lesse for any wicked use (though things of the strongest vertues or spirits are capable of the greatest both use and abuse, and edge tools are not to be committed to Children or mad men) not to ingrosse what is favourable to our selves, and throw what is odious upon others; nor for a deceitfull politique veyle to dissimulation, which of all evils the Scholar abhors, being true to himself and to others▪ But for a more wholsome Philosophicall, yea Divine use, to establish, settle, and determine truth and goodnesse; as Democritus hath seen some excellent Divines▪ out of this furniture mainly to have done. For

as Bonum est ex integra causa, so Verum est ex conspectis Circumstantiis: and as Non est Bonum, quod non est Rationabiliter bonum; So Nil tam certum, quam quod ex Dubio certum.
         
         
            XCIII.
            In single Proverbs those challenge the first place which are akin to those former in stating and casing; and such commonly are sentences which are bimembres and dilemmaticall, such are these which follow,
            
               He that speaks sows, and he that holds his peace gathers.
               If the brain sow not corn, it plants Thiftles.
               He who talks fopperies, either he is a fool, or he to whom he tels them.
            
            Shew a good man his errour, he turns it to a vertue; but if to an ill, he doubles his fault.
            He who builds a house in the street, it is either too high or too low.
            Honour the good, that he may honour thee; and the bad, that he may not dishonour thee.
         
         
            
            XCIV.
            Next those Proverbs deserve notice, which are most comprehensive, and are as it were virtuall Apophthegmes, which contain an expresse answer to an Objection suppressed and implied: and the words of emphasis which discover the Objection are underlin'd by the Scholar, or noted in a different character, as here.
            There were no ill language, if it were not ill taken.
            He that hath no ill Fortune is troubled with good.
            Set good against evill.
            A mans discontent is his worst evil.
            He that will sail without danger, must not sail on the Sea.
            Do what thou ought'st, and come what come can.
            Think of ease, but work on.
            It is more pains to do nothing then something.
            Of a little thing, a little displeaseth.
            
               
Great engines turn on little pins.
            An hard man gives more then he that hath nothing.
            An upbraided morsel never choaked a man.
            A fine morning never lasts a day.
            He that makes a thing too fine, breaks it.
            Good is good, but better carries it.
            Good cheap is dear (for it tempts a man to buy what he hath no need of)
            Justice pleaseth few in their owne house.
            Love your Neighbour, yet pull not down your hedge.
            And of this sort are many in Mimis Publianis, and in Senecae excerptis, and in Petrarchs work in imitation of him.
         
         
            
            XCIV.
            And not only these, but all such Proverbs of Caution as exceed, and therefore also must often crosse vulgar conceit and observation; those that tax common opinions, and the usuall unsound speeches as false asseverations, promises, excuses, &c. Here the honest Goldsmith sets a mark upon this false coyn which he meets with, that it may not passe for current to the cheating of others.
            
               Once in a year a man may say, On my conscience.
               A mans own opinion is never in the wrong.
               The absent party is still faulty.
               He that saith sure is not certain, and yes, yes, is but half a yea.
               A certain man is one of whom you are not to be certified.
               There is a Remedy, for every thing could men finde it.
            
            Were it not for the bone in the leg, all would turn Carpenters. (Si Nisi non

esset, perfectum quidlibet esset.)
            He that would have what he hath not, should do what he doth not.
            If you would be at ease, all the world is not.
            He that will do thee a good turn will either be gone or dye first.
            Better one Accipe, then twice to say Dabo tibi.
            The good Mother sayes not Will you, but gives.
            Soon is late, and by and by is when he pleaseth that sayes so.
            One of these dayes is none of these dayes.
            He that sayes he cannot, means he will not.
            He hath no leisure, who useth it not.
            He that will consider of it takes time to deny you handsomely.
            He that does as well as he can, never does well.
         
         
            
            XCVI.
            And as those Proverbs are of worth which check Pseudodoxy's, so have they their grace which are so delivered as to seem Paradoxes, such as these.
            He that repairs not a part, builds all. (by letting it go to ruine.)
            Poor men dye of surfets, and rich men of hunger (for poor men at Feasts over-eat themselves, and rich men in sicknesse are forbid necessaries.
            Who gives to all, denies all.
            Tye it well, and let it go. (Fast binde fast finde.)
            Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner.
         
         
            XCVII.
            A Proverb must have something in it more then an ordinary saying; Hyperboles and other Figures of Rhethorique are ordinary in it, sometimes it affects a little of the Riddle,

and some are so Aenigmaticall, which except in their own Countreys, will hardly be known without an Oedipus, as
            He that can make a Fire well can end a quarrell (both hard to be done, so as to please all.)
            A poor mans Cow dies, a rich mans Childe.
            Diseases of the eye are to be cured by the Elbow, (not to be cured till you dresse it with your Elbow.)
            A married man turns his staffe into a stake, (His state is not ambulatory and at liberty, but fixed and setled.)
         
         
            XCVIII.
            Rhithmicall Proverbs, and such whose elegancy consists in Figuris Dictionis are uncapable of Translation, and are of the weakest sort; yet usuall both in learned and vulgar languages; and some pleasure there is in the Musick of the words, which if frequent will be counted but jingling and quibling, But of all Figures,

the Metaphor is the most ordinary, and that taken either from such things as are common and familiar to all men, or from those arts and employments which are common and known where such Proverbs have thier birth and breeding: Yet because a similitude with one leg is but lame, and capable of a misapplication; therefore they are the more expressive and lively Proverbs, which have both the resemblance and the thing resembled briefly joyned together, as
            
               Truth and Oyle are ever above.
               Prayers and Provender never hinder journey.
               The Gown is his that wears it, and the world his that enjoys it.
               Play, women, and wine undo men laughing.
               Physicians faults are covered with earth, and rich mens with moneys.
               Water, Fire, and Souldiers quickly make room.
               Folly, Heresie, and Jealousie, are seldome cured.
               
                  
The Eye and Religion can bear no jesting.
            
         
         
            XCIX.
            Thus hath Democritus shown you the Vertues he observes in Apophthegmes and Proverbs, and the rather to show to others how the Scholar looks into these common things: and knowing the Art could for a need be the Authou▪ of an Apophthegm or a Proverb▪ and in this as in all his other studies it is his great desire to leave every thing better than he finds it. He knows every man hath his humour, and Demacritus his; and as he hath approved these vertues, so he dislikes not many, whereof he cannot give account wherein their vertue lyes: But as the Scholar will be ready to tell him, so is he as ready to tell them his weaknesse: as at present Democritus is taken with the humour of a sort of plain and vulgar Proverbs, and knows not why: He knows they have vertue in them, they are irrefragable and undeniable, they

stop reply, they are granted as soon as spoken: they please, they convince, they gain more then they speak for, and they are such as these.
            He that riseth first is first dressed.
            He that makes his bed ill, lies there.
            Who hath bitter in his mouth, spits not all sweet.
            Fair Language grates not the tongue.
            In every countrey dogs bite.
            More are threatned then hurt.
            In an hundred Ells of contention there is not an inch of love.
            A peece of a Churchyard fits every body.
            If every one mend one, all shall be mended.
            All flesh is not Venison.
            All is not Butter the Cow lets fall.
            There came nothing out of the Sack, but what was there.
            A woman conceals what she knows not.
            Foul water will quench fire. (Lust.)
            
               
In every Countrey the Sun riseth in the morning.
            Better half a Loaf then no bread.
            As long liveth a merry man as a sad.
         
         
            C.
            And seeing it is so, that sadnesse doth not prolong life more then mirth: the Scholar whose life is precious hath his Recreations, and long may the Fruit-Tree stand which is long a growing but when it is grown bears the most fruir, and the most wholsome and pleasant fruit: the Scholar therefore after sadnesse and dullnesse contracted by the bent and assiduity in serious studies hath his Relaxations, Nec semper arcum tendit Apollo. He hath either his Musicall or Mathematicall Recreations, History or Poetry, his Walks in Summer, and his Noctes Atticae in Winter; And in the perusall of these Proverbs, and selecting and ordering of them to his readiest use, he sets aside in a corner the Jocosa, to sport himself

with in his vacations: such these are to Democritus.
            Be not a Baker if your head be of Butter.
            He that hath a head of Wax must not walk in the Sun.
            When a Knave is in a Plum-Tree, he hath neither Friend nor kin.
            When one is on hors-back, he knows all things.
            He is mine Uncle that wisheth me well.
            He is my Neighbour, that grindes at my Mill.
            Here is a talk of the Turk, and of the Pope, but my next Neighbour does me more harm then either of them both.
            A fair Hostesse makes a fowl Reckoning.
            Ask mine Host, if he have good wine.
            Three can hold their peace if two be away.
            He that tels his wife News is but newly married.
            
         
      
   
