<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         A TESTIMONY Concerning the Life, Death, Trials, Travels and Labours of Edward Burroughs That worthy PROPHET OF THE LORD Who dyed a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God, in the City of London, the 14th of the 12th Month, 1662.
         F. H.
         London, Printed, and are to be sold by William Warwick, 1662.
      
   
   
      
         
         
         The Life and Death of Edward Burroughs that worthy Prophet of the Lord, &c.
         SHall days, or months, or years wear out thy Name, as though thou hadst had no being? Oh nay! Shall not thy noble and valiant Acts, and mighty Works which thou hast wrought through the power of him that separated thee from the Womb, live in generations to come? Oh yes! the children that are yet unborn, shall have thee in their mouths, and thy Works shall testifie of thee in generations, who yet have not a being, and shall count thee blessed. Did thy Life go out as the snuff of a Candle? Oh nay! thou hast penetrated the hearts of many, and the memorial of the just shall live for ever, and be had in renown among the children of Wisdom for ever; for thou hast turned many to righteousness, and shall shine as a Star of God in the Firmament of God's Power, for ever and ever; and they that are in that, shall see thee there, and enjoy thee there, though thou be gone away hence, and can no more be seen in mutability; yet thy Life, and thy Spirit shall run parallel with Immortality. Oh Edward Burroughs! I cannot but mourn for thee, yet not as one without hope nor faith, knowing and having a perfect testimony of thy well-being in my heart, by the Spirit of the Lord; yet thy absence is great, and years to come shall know the want of thee. Shall I not lament as David did for a worse man than thee, even for Abner when in wrath he perished by the hand of Joab without any just cause, though he was a valiant man? David lamented over Abner, and said, Dyed Abner as a fool dyeth? (Oh nay! he was betrayed of his Life) even so hast thou been bereaved of thy life by th hand of the Oppressor, whose habitations are full of cruelty. Oh my soul, come not thou within their

secret, for thy blood shall be required at the hands of them who thirsted after thy life; and it shall cry as Abels, who was in the Faith; even so wert thou; it shall weigh as a ponderous Milstone upon their necks, and shall crush them under, and be as a Worm that gnaweth and shall not dye: When I think upon thee, I am melted into tears of true sorrow; and because of the want that the Inheritance of the Lord hath of thee, my substance is even as dissolved: Shall I not say as David said of Saul and Jonathan when they were slain in Mount Gilboa, The beauty of Israel is slain upon the high places: Even so wast thou stifled  nasty holes and prisons, and many more, who were precious in the eyes of the Lord: And surely precious wast thou to me, oh dear Edward, I am distressed for th my brother; very pleasant hast thou been to me, and my love to thee was wonderful, passing the love of women: Oh thou whose Bow never turned back, neither Sword empty from the blood of the slain, from the slaughter of the mighty; who made Nations and Multitudes shake with the Word of Life in thy mouth, and wast very dreadful to the enemies of the Lord, for thou didst cut like a Rasor; and yet to the seed of God brought forth, thy words dropped like Oyle, and thy lips as the honey-comb. Thou shalt be recorded among the valiant of Israel, who attained to the first degree through the power of the Lord, that wrought mightily in thee in thy day, and was worthy of double honor, because of thy Works sake; thou wast expert to handle thy Weapon, and by thee the mighty have fallen, and the slain o the Lord hath been many; many have been pricked o heart through the Power of the Word of Life, and coales of fire from thy Life come forth of thy mouth, that in many a thicket, and among many bryars and thorns it cae to be kindled, and did devour much stubble that cumbed the ground, and stained the Earth. Oh how certain a sound did thy Trumpet give! And how great an Alrm didst tou give in thy day, that made the Host of the uncircumsed grealy distressed! What man so valant, though as Goliah of Gath, would not thy Valour have encountered with, while many despised thy youth! And how have I seen thee with hy sling and thy stone (despised Weapons as to war with) wound the mighty, and that which hath seemed contemptible to the

Dragons party, even as the Jaw-bone of an Asse, with it thou hast slain the Philistines heaps upon heaps, as Sampson. Thou hast put to thy hand to the Hammer of the Lord, and has often fastened Nailes in the heads of the Lambs Enemies, as Dborah did to Sisera; and many a rough stone hast thou polished and squared, and made it fit for the building of God; and much knotty Wood hast thou hewed in thy day, which was not fit for the building o God's House, Oh thou Prophet of the Lord, and shalt for ever be recorded in the Lambs Book of Life, among the Lords Worthies, who have followed the Lamb through great tribulation, as many can witness for thee from the beginning; and at last hath overcome, and found worthy to stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion the Hill of God, as I have often seen thee, and thy heart well tuned as a Harp, to praise the Lord, and to sound forth his great salvation, which many a time hath made glad the hearts of them that did believe, and strengthen their faith and hope. Well, thou art at res; and bound up in the bundle of Life; and I know tears was wiped away from thy eyes, because there was no cause of sorrow in thee: For I know thou witnessed the old things done away, and there was no curse but blessings were poured upon thy head as rain, and peace as a mighty shower, and trouble was far from thy dwelling, though in the outward man trouble on every side, and hath had a greater share in that, fo the Gospel sake (though a youth in thy time) thn many besides: But now thou art freed from that, and hst obtained a Name through Faith, with the Saints in Light. Well, hadst thou more to give up then thy Life for the Name of Jesus in this World? Nay; and to seal thy Testimony committed unto thee with thy blood as thou hast often said in thy day, which shall remain as a Crown upon thee for ever and ever. And now thou art freed from the empttions of him who had the power of death, and art freed from thy outward Enemies, who hated thee because of the Life that dwelt in thee, and remaineth at the right hand of God, where there is joy and pleasure for evermore in the everlasting Light, which thou hast often testified unto, according to the Word of Propesie in thy heart, which was given unto hee by the Holy Ghost, and art at rest in the perfection thereof, in the beauty of Holiness; yet thy Life and

thy Spirit I feel as present, and have unity with it, and in it, beyond all created and visible thing, which are subjet to utation and change; and thy Life shall enter into other, to testifie unto the same truth, which is from everlasting to everlsting; for God hath raised, and will raise up children unto Abraham, of them that have been as dead stones, whose Poer is Almighty, great in his people in the midst of their Enemies.
         This same Edward Burroughs was born in the Barrony of Kendal, in the County of Westmoreland, of honest Parents, who had a good report among their Neighbours for upright and honest dealing among men, who brought up Edward in his youth in learning and good Education as the Countrey doth afford. He was a very understanding Boy in his youth, and his knowledge and understanding did far exceed his years: He had the Spirit of a man when he was but as a child; and I may say, grey hirs was upon him when he was but a youth; for he was cloathed with Wisdom in his Infancy; for I had perfect knowledge of him from a youth. He was inclinable from his youth upwards, to Religion, and the best way, always minding the best things, and the best and nearest way of Worship to the Scriptures of Truth, and always did accompany the best men, who walked in godliness and honesty, insomuch I have often admired his discreet carriage, and his great understanding of the things of God: He was never known to be addicte to any vic or malignity, or bad behaviour, neither followed any evil course of life from his childhood, but feared the Lord, and walked uprightly according to the light and knowledge received in all things. In his natural disposition he was bold and manly, dexterous and fervent; and what he took in hand, he did it with his might; loving, kind and courteous, merciful and flexible, and easie to be entreated. His whole delight was always mong good people, and to be conferring and reading the Scriptures, and little to mind any sports or pastimes, which there is an infidency unto in youth; but his very strength was bended after God, and was separated (I may say) from his Mothers Womb, and fitting for the Works sake whereunto he after was called.
         
            And when it pleased the Lord to raise up the acient horn of salvation among us, who were reckoned in the North part of England, even as the out casts of Israel, and as men destitut of the great knowledge which some seemed to enjoy; yet there was more sincerity and true love among us, and desires fter the living powerful presence of God then was among many in that day, who seemed to make a great flourish, who ran into heaps and forms, but left the Cross behind them, and indeed were strangers to it; God out of his everlasting love did appear unto us according to the desire of our hearts who longed after him, when we had turned aside from the hireling Shepherds Tnts, we found him whom our souls loved, and God out of his great love, and great mercy, sent one unto us immediately by his Power, a man of God, one of ten thousand, to instruct us in the way of God more perfectly, who laid down the sure foundation, and declared the acceptable year of the Lord; who indeed made the mourners to reoice, and the heavy hearted glad, which yet was terrible to all hypocrites, and all formal profession; which testimony reached unto all our consciences, and entered into the inmost part of our hearts, which drove us to a narrow search, and to a diligent inquisition concernig our stte, which we did come to see through the Light of Christ Jesus which was testified of, and found it to be even what it was testified of; and the Lord of heaven and earth we found to be near at hand; and as we waited upon him in pure silence, our minds out of all things, his dreadful power and glorious Majesty, and heavenly presence appeared in our Assemblies, when there was no language, tongue nor speech from any creature; and the Kingdom of heaven did gather us, and catch us all as in a Net, and his heavenly power at one time did draw many hundreds to Land, that we did come to know a place to stand in, and what to wait in, and the Lord did appear daily to us, to our astonishment, amazement, and great admiration, insomuch that we often said one unto another with great joy of heart, What, is the Kingdom of God come to be with men? And will he take up his Tabernacle amongst the sons of men, as he did of old? And what, shall we that were reckoned as the outcasts of Israel, have this honor of glory communicated amongst us, which were but men of small parts??? and of little abiiis, in respect of many

othrs as amongst men? Howbeit, thus it seemed good unto the Lord to choose the weak things, and the foolish things of this World, as to the aspect of me, that no flesh might glory, that no man because of his parts might glory, or because of his strengh or wisdom might glory, but that the glory which is his might onely be given to him; unto whom be the glory of all his Works for ever and ever, Amen.
         And from that day forward our hearts were knit unto the Lord, and one unto another in true and fervent love, not by any external Covenan, or external Form; but we entered into the Coveant of Life with God, and that was as a strong obligation or bond upon all ou spirits, which united us one unto another; and we met together in the unity of the spirit, and of the bond of peace, treading down under our feet all reaoning, questioning, debating and contending about Religion, or any part or parts, or practice or practices thereof, as to any eternal thing; and we waited at time and times, as God did grant u opportunities, and the more we had ad could obtain from our necessary occasions of this present life, the better we were, and the more we were confirmed and strengthened in our hope and faith; and holy resolutions were kindled in our hearts as a fire??? which the Life kindled in us to serve the Lord while we had a being, and o make mention of his Name and Power whilst we did live, and to hold forth that Testimony which was committed to us, in the sight of men and Nations, by doctrine, by practice, by a holy conversation; and mightily did the Word of God grow amongst us, and the desires of many were after the Name of the Lord. Oh happy day! Oh blessed day! the memorial of which can never pass out of my mind. And thus the Lord in short did form us to be a people for his praise in our generation.
         Howbeit after all this and much more, which time would fail me to write of, (neither is the purpose of my spirit bent that way at this time) we did come through very great tribulations, extream distresses, great perplexity, and passed out oftentimes hungry, and hard put to it both within and without; yet such wa our love to the Lord, and such fervency in our herts, that we rather chused to dye, and to undergo every difficulty, than to dishonor or deny the Name of Christ in the midst of suffering; because of that taste that we had of his goodness and immortal

life revealed in our hearts, this young man of whom I am speaking, had his share, though but a youth at that time, of 16. or 17. years of age, because of the Truth which crossed all the Worlds way; his nearest Relations, even his own Parents cast him off as an Alien, and turned him out from their House, as not to have any part or portion therein as a son, nay, not so much as a hired servant, which this young man bore very patiently, without murmuring or complaining, having a taste of that then, which was better than all the World; and through conversing with his people, and among them, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and the Spirit of Wisdom and understanding entered into his heart, and the spirit of knowledge and sound judgment came to be seated in his reins, and the Spirit of Prophesie came upon him like as it did upon many more, through the Holy Ghosts power and operation; and he spake of the wonderful things of God amongst them that believed, and was one of the first among us which the Lord opened the mouth of, to shew forth his praise, and to speak of the things of his Kingdom to as many as he met with, who waited for the consolation of Israel, for the riches of the Gentiles, and to as many as desired and hoped after eternal life: At last the Lord singled him out, & commanded him to go forth into Countreys unknown to him, as he did some more besides, upon whom he laid a necessity to preach the Gospel freely, without money, without price, without tythes, augmentations, gifts or rewards, and in that he was as faithful a man, none exceeding him in his generation; for those things were an abhorrency to his heart; & where he met with any such hireling Shepherds, & deceitful workers which had gull'd the Nations, and cheated the people for dishonest gain, and kept them in blindness, the indignation of the Lord was kindled in his heart, and the sword of the Lord was very sharp in his hand; and whomsoever he met with which walked after this sort, they were sure to feel the weight of his Weapon, and the force of his blow, by which many have been deeply wounded, that they have grinned like Dogs on him, as greedy Dogs indeed, because of their present wound & blow that he did give them; and though he was but young in years, yet he was full of fortitude and true valour: The Lord often times when he exercised

him in such War as this, hath filled his Quier full of polished shafts, and made his Bow to abide in strength, and he was as dextrous and as ready handed, as any that I knew in his day, against the Dragon and his Power, against the Beast and his followers; and indeed he was very even-handed, and had a special good arm, and seldome mist the Mark: God had fill'd his mouth with arguments, so that he hath often made a breach, a breach in the face of an Host.
         And it was my lot (which I cannot but say fell in a good ground) to be his companion and fellow-labourer in he Work of the Gospel, whereunto we were called for many years together: And oh! when I consider, my heart is broken; how sweetly we walked together for many Months & Years! in which we had perfect knowledg of one anothers hearts, & perfect unity of spitri, not so much as one cross word, or one hard thought of discontent ever rose (I believe) in either of our hearts, fo 10 years together, but our souls were bound up in unity and peace, having the frame of our hearts bent after one and the self same thing, to wit, the propagation of that Truth by which liberty was obtained, and salvation received through Jesus Christ the true Light of the World, seeing through his Light he whole World to lye in wickedness; a necessity laid upon this person of whom I am speaking, being constrained by the Spirit of the Lord, by which he was made an able Minister of the everlasting Gospel, to preach repentance, conversion, salvation and remission of sins; and accordingly he went forth in he Name and Power of the Lord Jesus the Saviour of mankind, and was an able Minister of the glad tydings of salvation, in many, or most parts of this Land; and also he travelled thorow again and again, the whole Nation of Ireland, and in some part of Scotland, and some part of Flanders; and his Ministry as made effectual through the Almighty Power of God, in turning many from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; there are many thousands who are living in the body, and alive in the Truth, who can in the Spirit of the Lord bear testimony to the power and verity of his Ministry, in many Countreys where he travelled; for he laboured much in divers places, even in the heat of the day, though he began early in the morning; and in the beginning of his travels and labours,

it was his share to break up rough places and unilled ground; & to walk amongst many bryars and thorns, which scratched, and pricked, and teared; and travelled with some other, not without great opposition; and he often trod the pathes and wayes which had not been occupied in the Truth; and where darkness had the Dominion, and was as a covering, he brake through as an armed man, not minding the opposition, but the victory, and the good of all souls; though to my knowledg his sufferings and tryas hath not been small, nor his exercise a little, on the right hand, and on the left, in travels often, often times buffered, sometimes knocked down by unreasonable men, who had not faith, loaded with lyes, slanders, calumnies and reproaches, often in weakness, yea in deaths often, in watchings, fastings and temptations often; in straits and necessities; in perils among rude multitudes, in perils in Idol-Temples, in perils in Streets and Markets, where the Lord did move him often to go in the beginning of his time; besides the exceeding weight of service from Weeks end to Weeks end, in so much that he had seldome many hours of repose; and ofen suffered by those spirits who lost their first love, and rose in opposition. He was very diligent and faithful, true-hearted and valiant, and the yoke at last came to be easie unto him, though no ease at all in the body as to the outward man; for he made the Work of the Lord his whole business, without taking so much liberty unto himself, or about any outward occasion in this World, as to spend one Week to himself (to my knowledg) these ten years: He had ventured himself often for the Bodies sake; and a great care I know was in his heart, that them that he had ministred unto, and others that had believed in the same truth, might thrive and prosper, and might walk as becometh the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
         He was of a manly Spirit in the things of God; he hath engaged himself often upon the Lords account singly in great Disputes, when there were many opposers; he hath stood in the door, and in the gap, against all his Enemies, for the worthy Name of God, and taken the whole weight of thing upon his on shoulders, that others might be eased, though often to he weakening, and almost destroying of the outward man, yet doing all in love to the Lord, and for his peoples sake; he did it

with chearfulness, and it was a grief to him if any opportunity was missed of doing good: He was a man of no great learning in natural Tongues, which men so much applaud; yet indeed his heart was full of matter, and his Tongue was as the hand of a ready Scribe and yet he had the tongue of the learned, having had experiment of the Work of the Lord, and being acquainted with many conditions which God had carried him through, he could speak a word in season unto all who declared their conditions unto him; of otherways in his publike Ministry he was very plausible and elegant in his speech, & indeed had the tongue of a learned Orator to declare himself to the understandings & consciences of all men with whom he conversed, by which many received great profit, and their understandings came to be opened; for his words ministred grace to the Heare, and his words were forcible and very pleasant, as apples of Gold in pictures of silver.
         This young man of whom I am speaking, was one of the first (with some others) who came to the City of London, where he met with no small opposition both from professors of divers forms, and also prophane, who heeded no Religion at all, and the way of Truth seemed contemptible, and without form or comeliness to them all, which made the opposition so great, and the labour so hard, that notwithstanding it pleased the Lord to reach unto the Consciences of many, and many were prickt to the heart, so that they cried out, what shall we do to be saved? And God made his Ministry very effectual to the conversion of many in the City of London, whereby a great change was wrought in the hearts of many, & many hundreds brought to know the Lord their Teacher, which are as seals unto the Word of Life through him unto this day. And many hundreds, I may say thousands, heard the lively Word of God declared by him, and were convinced of the way of Truth, though still remaining in the disobedience to that of God in their own hearts unto which he declared; and many have lost their day which they had of hearing and receiving the things of God; for now he is taken away which might have been a help unto them while they had time; and all such are not worthy of him. He continued in this City very much at time and times, betwixt

eight and nine years together, preaching the Word of God, and speaking of the things of his Kingdom to all that looked after it; and great watching, travel, and exercise in the Work of the Lord; and his earnest desire was, That all might have come to know God's salvation, and the redemption of their souls. And his great diligence was known unto many, that his only rejoicing was in the prosperity of the Work of the Lord, and the encrease of Faith amongst them that did believe; And his heart was much drawn towards this City; and often times hath he said to me when suffering did come for the Gospel sake, which he knew would come, I can freely go to that City, and lay down my Life for a Testimony of that Truth which I have declared through the Power and Spirit of God: Which in the end indeed came to be his share, and will for ever be his Crown, who loved not his life unto death for the Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ.
         And in the same year 1662. being pressed in his spirit to go visit them who were begotten unto the Faith of God's Elect at the City of Bristol, and in divers other Counties, at divers Meetings, and divers particular Friends, he took his leave of them, saying unto very many, That he did not know he should see their faces any more; exhorting them all to faithfulness and stedfastness in that wherein they had found rest for their souls: And said to some, I am going up to the City of London again, to lay down my Life for the Gospel, and suffer amongst Friends in that place, as having some sence of his suffering before.
         And a little after his return to the City, at a publike Meeting which the people of the Lord have kept these many years, to hear and speak of the things of God to edification, at the Bull and and Mouth near Aldersgate, by certain Souldiers under the command of Richard Brown then General of the City of London, he was violently plucked down, and haled away in a barbarous manner, and carryed to the guard, and so committed to Newgate, not for evil-doing, but for testifying unto the Name of the Lord Jesus, and for the Worship of God, as though this were become a great crime worthy of Bonds, and (at last) death; he was had to the

Sessions in the Old Baily, and his accusers were Witnesses against him, and them that had abused him violently, their Testimony was received as good proof against him. And at last after two or three Sessions, he was fined by the Court one hundred Mark, which at last was reduced to twenty Mark, and to lie in prison while payment; Where he continued a pretty long season, above 8 Months, with 6 or 7 score Prisoners beide, upon the same account, many being shut up among the Felons in nasty places, and for want of Prison-room, the natures of many were suffocated and corrupted, till at last many grew vveak, sickned, and dyed.
         At last this same young man grew vveak, and though a special Order from the King was sent to the then Sheriffs of London, for the release of him and the rest that were left in prison, yet such was the enmity of some of the Rulers of the City, that they did what in them lay to obstruct the execution of the Order, that he should not be released: And so weakness grew upon him daily, though in much patience he was carried through all. In the time of his sickness he was very fervent in prayer (and that often, both day and night) unto the Lord as concerning himself, and also his people; and at several times he spoke several precious words from the sensible feeling of God's spirit in his heart, and said, I have had the testimony of the Lords love unto me from my youth; and my heart hath been given up to do thy Will: And he said, I have preached the Gospel freely in this City, and have often given up my Life for the Gospels sake; and now Lord rip open my heart, and see if it be not right before thee. Another time he said when he had a little ease, There is no iniquity lyes at my door, but the presence of the Lord is with me, and his life I feel justifie me. Another day afterwards he said, Thou hast loved me when I was in the Womb, and I have loved thee from my Cradle, and from my youth unto this day, and have served thee faithfully in my generation. And he spoke to Friends that were about him, to live in love and peace, and love one another. And at another time he said, The Lord taketh the righteous from the evil to come; and he prayed for his Enemies, and for his persecutors, and said, Lord forgive Richard Brown, he may be forgiven. And though the distemper and the disease was violently upon him, yet he was preserved sensible; and in the morning before he departed this life, being sensible of his

death, he said, Now my soul and spirit is centered in its own Being with God; and this form of person must return from whence it was taken: And after a little season he gave up the Ghost, and dyed a Prisoner, and shall be recorded, and is in the Lambs Book of Life, as a Martyr for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, for which only he suffered, and gave up his Life, whose death was precious in the eyes of the Lord. But now he ever liveth with God, and his Works follow him, and labour shall testifie of him in generations to come; and thousands beside my self can bear witness, His Life and death was to the praise, glory and honor of the Grace of God; unto whom be the glory of all his Works for ever and ever, Amen.
      
      
         AND oh thou City of London! who hast been a professing City of the Name of God and Christianity so many years, must it be said of thee as Christ said of Jerusalem, that a Prophet cannot perish out of thee: Oh how many Warnings hast thou had! and how dost thou remain in obdurateness and impenitency! Oh! thou art not worthy of those heavenly tydings of salvation which hath been proclaimed in the midst of thee these many years, by this faithful Messenger of God deceased, with many more, who is taken away in judgement unto thee, because many of thy Inhabitants despised and set at nought that in which the blessedness of all Nations consisteth. Oh how is thy Gold become dim! and how is thy glory stained! How is thy countenance marred! How is all thy profession become dead, and thou like a withered Tree without sap! The symptomes of death are upon thee; Your Sun is set, your glory is passed away; night is coming, and darkness is surrounding you, and you shall have enough of dakness, and your pathes and ways shall be filled with it, because you have hated the Light, and would not have him who is the Light of the World, to rule in your hearts; but hath chused darkness rather than Light, because your deeds are evil, and in the end thou shalt be made to see, you have chosen lying vanities, and have taken pleasure in the flesh, and have forsaken your own mercies. Repent, repent (if any can find a place) while it is called to day, lest you be shut up in everlasting darkness, and Truth be hid from your eyes for ever. Take warning, cease from persecution and afflicting the Lords people, who desire to live quietly and peaceably, and to worship God in truth and righteousness,

with a pure heart: It is too too much that you have done already; the suffering and death of many innocent righteous men, who have suffered these Winters past, will lie as a load upon your City in Summers to come. Remember what God did to Amaleck the first of the Natios, and to Moab when Israel would have passed to their own Land an Countrey that God had promised them, and have eaten their own bread, and drank their water, and have passed on peaceably; but they rose up and fell upon the poor, and upon the hindmost and weak; God was glad o force his way, though it proved the ruine of Amaleck, and the misery of Moab. We would gladly walk on our way to the promised Land whch belongs to the Saints in Light; we would eat our own Bread, and drink our water and what we needed, and keep our Consciences clear (in our generation we must) to that which God hath promised; and if we cannot have a way, God will make one for us; and that you that set your selves against the Lord, in the end shall be sure to know and feel, though we shall never lift up carnal Weapon, nor drawsword, neither use Bow nor Spear; for God hath taught us to love our Enemies; and out of these things we are come, and to the end of Wars, and to be for it; yet God's purpose shall be fulfilled, and he hath ways enough to plead the cause of his people, and he will do it, and wo to all their Enemies. And do you cry ou of Popery because of cruelty and persecution? And will you be found in the same footsteps, and in the same nature? Oh! let it never be said nor thought, that ever the Church of God or true Christians did drink the blood of the Saints, or cast them into prison; for that is Babylon the Mother of Harlots, that doth so. Therefore be informed and warned; set not bryars and thorns in battel against the Lord, neither stubble before devouring fire; for if you do, a consumption will come upon you, and your name and memorial shall rot, dye, wither, and melt away as Snailes; and glory shall rest with, and upon the Heads of the sufferers of Christ for ever.
         
            By one who hath chosen rather to suffer with the people of God called Quakers, than to enoy the pleasures of sin for a season, or to be reckoned as a Prince amongst the uncircumcised, Fran. Howgil.
            Reading the 22. of the 12. Month 1662.
            
         
      
      
         
         ANd as for E.B. our dear Brother and companion in travel, suffering and consolation for the everlasting Gospel sake in his day, his Testimony lives with us; he was a Preacher of Righteouness, and one who travelled for the redemption of the creature from under the bondage of corruption, and proclaimed liberty to the captives in the power and authority f God, and therein was a true Witness against Oppression, and all the Antichristian yokes imposed in the night of Apostacy??? upon the persons and consciences of people; and truly and valiantly he held forth the Liberty of Conscience, and vindicated it to the great men of the Earth, in things appertaining to God in matters of Religion and Worship, against the persecution and compulsion (which had its Original nd Rise from the Power of the Beast, which hath made war against the righteous seed) that men might be left free to the guidance of the infallible Spirit of God (which is not to be limited) in these matters, and not be compelled nor brought under the corrupt wills of men, nor their fallible judgements nor invented forms in these cases: And the Name of this Minier of Righteousness is written in the Lmbs Book of Life; and all the Enemies of his Life can never be able to blot it ou, nor extinguish his memorial. Oh! the remembrance of his integrity, uprightness and sincerity, hath deep impression upon my heart; & that tender love and affection in God's Truth which he was filled with towards all the upright, (who are lovers of peace & unity in the Lord) is never to be forgotten by u who are yet remaining in the Work of the Lord, and the everlasting Gospel, for which he hath left a glorious Testimony, the glory of which shall never be extinguished, but thousands shall praise the Lord our God because thereof; yea, even the Seed that's yet in the lower parts of the Earth (where darkness covers it) and the child that's yet unborn in many, that's curiously framed in the Mothers Womb, wose Members are written in the Book of God, shall glorifie the Lord on his behalf. And this testimony many have already concerning him, that though his Body be dead, his Spirit liveth in the immortality of that Life

that is immutable, and shall never dye nor wax old, and is felt among the righteous, who walk in their integrity and constancy to the Lord.
         And this faithful servant of the Lord, and valiant Souldier of the Lamb (as in his day was evidently apparent) as to live to him was Christ, to dye was gain: And though in his time many were the sufferings and affictions which his life went under, and his upright spirit suffered by, both from his open enemies and persecutors in the World (because of the valour and courage for the Truth of God) and from deceitful and transforming exalted spirits, which burthen the holy Seed; but now his Life is caught up above them all (and is out of their reach) in the transcendent and unspeakable glory, in the everlasting habitation and firmament of God's Power, where he hath shined (and doth shine) among the Stars, that have kept their habitations, as one that hath turned many to righteousness, and that hath overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony, with those holy Prophets and Martyrs who rejoice over Babylon and her abominations (in whom their blood is found) and against whom he was a faithful Witness and valiant Warrier, whose living and absolute Testimony therein, God hath blessed, made prosperous, and wil fulfil to the uttermost. And though he be ceased from his labours, his Works do follow him, which wil be had in living remembrance and precious esteem among the upright, when his persecutors shall be broken and laid low in the desolation and ruine of Babylon; and all that continue in enmity and deceit, and all the deceitful spirits that have burthened his righteous soul, shall fall, and their blossome wither and come to nought.
         And if any of his persecutors or oppressors be yet so impenitent and obdurate as to triumph and be elevated in an exalted or prejudiced spirit, because of his death, and in their exaltation and pride of heart say, he was taken away in judgment, or in wrath.
         To such in Gods fear I answer, That thousands of the servants of the Lord are of another perswasion, not questioning but it was in Gods tender love (as to his own particular) that he was removed out of the Earthen Vessel, in which he (though a man as in the prime of his years) endured great travel in his

time for the Truth's sake, and the gathering of many into the way of the Lord, and in which his travel was the greater (when the time of his dissolution drew near) to be dissolved, because of his suffering (and the extremity of his sicknesse occasioned thereby) which many others were partakers of, who suffered persecution and imprisonment by unreasonable men in this City of London, for the cause of God and of a good Conscience, as chifly for their meeting together fingly in the Worship of God.
         But this I testifie in the Lord, as in him I have felt, that his being removed, was in judgement from the Lord against his persecutors, who desired and sought his destruction; and what they have done against him hath greatly added to the fulfilling of their iniquities, that the blood of the righteous which cryes for vengeance may be avenged to the utmost upon them who would not suffer the righteous to have a being amongst men, nor lay to heart their being taken away from the evil to come.
         And they who in a byassed or prejudiced spirit of enmity are lifted up because of his decease, they were not worthy of him, nor of his Testimony, and they have cause to mourn and lament amongst those that have pierced the just, and slighted and despised the Messengers of Truth and Righteousnesse, whom God hath therein honored, and God will debase such, and their vain glory unto the dust, and exalt the testimony and life of his faithful Witnesses over all their heads.
         But we who have been well acquainted with the deep suffering of the righteous Seed, and with the worth of true unity, in the weighty body and spirit of Christ, and therein do behold the glory and compleatnesse of the City of our God, which is at peace within it self, cannot but prize the Ministers of Righteousnesse, and every Member of the same Body; and oh how blessed and precious is the memorial of the righteous in our eyes! And how deeply is my soul affected with that comfortable communion, and those many and living refreshments that we have enjoyed one with another, even with him and others, who have finished their course! Well, however in this I am satisfied, that though we be left in travel, and our days have been days of affliction and suffering for Christ and the

gospels sake, (as in the World) yet in him whom the Prince of this World hath nothing in, we have peace, being come into communion with the Spirits of just men, who are the Family of God, written in Heaven, and called by one name both in Heaven and Earth, and the God of Life is their portion, and his glory is the Rereward of his called, and chosen, and faithful ones, who have dealt their Bread to the hungry, and brought the poor to their House, even to the habitation of the righteous, where the living Bread is received, and the Heavenly Mansions lived in, and enjoyed by all who abide in the Truth, and retain their first Love, and habitation therein, in which true fellowship is enjoyed, and the prosperity of the elect Seed known: blessed be the Name of our God for ever and ever.
         
            Gorge Whitehead.
            London the 12th day of the first month, 1663.
            
         
      
      
         
         A Testimony of truth concerning the Servant of the Lord, and Minister of Jesus Christ, Edward Burroughs.
         FRiends, a necessity is upon me, and I am even constrained and pressed in my spirit to bring in and give my Testimony concerning my beloved Brother before-mentioned, that it may remain and stand upon Record for Ages and Generation to come.
         And this first I say and declare unto all people unto whom this shall come, That he was a man endued with the Almighty Power of God which lived and reigned in him; nd the treasury of pure, Divine, Heavenly Wisdom was opened in him, &c. and understanding (in the things that relate unto God's Kingdom of peace and righteousness, and in the things that concern the everlasting peace and well-being of all mankind) was plentifully manifested unto him by the good Spirit of God, which (I may say) he had received in a plentiful measure: And this many can testifie unto, and his own Writings which remain upon record, will in a large measure manifest the truth thereof. And this spirit dwelt plentifully in him, so that thereby he wa able to instruct many in the way of life, peace and true holiness; and if any were afflicted in spirit or mind, by reason of the wiles of the Enemy of their souls, or if they met with any difficulty in their journey, as they passed from death to life, he was a man able (through the large experience that he had of the dealings of the Lord, and also of the wiles of Satan, having followed the Lamb in the regeneration) to administer a word in season to their refreshment and comfort, and for their establishment in the most precious, holy Faith; and this I know the Witnesse of God in thousands must and shall testifie unto, who are the seal of his Ministry. And moreover he was a man that was able (through the wisdom and blessed gift of God that was in him) to convince and stop the mouths of all gainsayers of the truth, which he (with us) professed and lived

in. And it is well known unto many, that he was never backwards, but always ready and willing to appear in a way of publike conference, as in vindication of (and against any that should oppose) the blessed Truth of God which he held and professed, and also to manifest the grounds and reasons wherefore, we deny (and dissent from) the National Priets of the World, (and their traditional ways of Worship) and the hypocritical professors thereof, who have not the life and substance of what they profess in words. And these things (it is well known unto many) he was oft exercised in; and he did not go about in corners, nor creep into dark places hiddenly nor secretly, but preached the Truth of God, and Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ boldly and openly, even upon the house tops, and his valour for God's Truth on Earth, was well known unto many, and his voice was as the sound or ratling of the Charriots of God's Host upon the tops of the Mountains, and was oft uttered forth in the Name of the Lord, even like thunder, and the voice of the Son of God was uttered forth through him, by which the dead was raised; the Witnesses are now alive, let them bring in their testimony, that the truth hereof may be confirmed. His Doctrine dropped as the Oyle of joy upon the Spirits of the mourners in Sion. His Life extended it self as a sweet stream into the hearts of the children of Light that thirsted after righteousness: He was one of the Cloud of Witnesses that dropped down the dew upon the tender plants of God. He pleaded the cause of the innocent suffering Seed, and earnestly contended with the Powers of the Earth of all sorts, in the behalf, and for the freedom of the suffering people of God: He fore prophesied unto them that were in Authority in the days past, of their destruction, and of their overthrow, because of their deceitfulness to God, and their false and cruel, treacherous and merciless dealings towards his people, who had made many fair promises both to God and man in the time of their adversity, That they would grant free liberty of Conscience in things relating to the Worship of God, and that Oppression should be removed, and the like; but in the time of their prosperity, when they were waxen fat, and grown great, and lived at ease and in pleasures, then they forgot God, and regarded not to perform their Engagements neither to God

nor his people; for which cause the Lord cut them off in hi sore displeasure, and brought an utter desolation upon them, according to the words of his Servants, and this Prophet of God lived to see their desolation come, (which was sad to behold) and his Prophesies was fulfilled in his own days. And he also warned the present Rulers of this Nation to take heed of walking in the steps of them that are gone before. And for these things, and for the publishing of the Truth of God, and for bearing his Testimony with boldnesse against all Oppression and Cruelty, he was hated of the men of this genertion, but chiefly by some of the Rulers of the City of London: He sealed his Testimony with his Life in bonds; and so they have wilfully brought innocent blood upon themselves, and heavy will it lye upon them in the day of account (which greatly hastens) wherein the Lord God wil make inquisition for the blood of the innocent, and reward every man according to his deeds; then wil his blood be upon you as the blood of a thousand men; and how wil you bear your sentence from the Lord of Hosts, because you will be found guilty of the blood of his Prophets, Messengers and Servants, which he sent unto you in love to your souls, to forewarn you of the evil which greatly hastens to come upon you: Yet notwithstanding you have done all these things, and the cry of innocent blood hath been heard so loud amongst you, yet have you hardened your hearts and go on in stiff-neckedness, and persist in your cruelty towards the servants of the Lord that are left behind, and are found casting them into prison: Oh wo is me for you! where will a place be found for you in the day of the Lord? or what covering will you hide yourselves under? Or how wil you appear before the righteous God of Heaven and Earth? Have you no consideration in you of your latter end? Or else do you believe that the Lord sees not your cruelty towards his people, that you will not answer his requirings, which is to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with the Lord, and to do unto all men as you would they should do unto? surely if the consideration of these things was in your hearts, or if you had any regard to keep your consciences clear in the sight of God herein, you could never do as you have done. Wherefore consider these things, and lay them to heart, and repent speedily,

lest you sin your day away, and place of repentance there cannot be found: For this I tell you plainly, that it is in vain for you to strive against the Lord, or to seek to stop or hinder his work which he hath begun; for he will be too strong for you, and he will make you bow and bend to his own Name and Power, whether you will or no. And though he bear with you long, and suffer you long, yet his long-suffering wil come to an end; and though you should be permitted to fulfil your envious wills and lustful desires so fa as to banish, or kill, or destroy us from off the earth, yea all of us who are now in being, (which I do not believe ever shall be) yet would God raise up another people by the same power and spirit in and by which we stand, which should be a terror unto you, and should possess God's everlasting Kingdom (which is not of this World) over your heads.
         And in the time of his outward weakness he was heard to say, That though this body of Clay must return to the dust, yet I have this Testimony that I have served God in my generation, an that spirit which hath lived, and acted, and ruled in me, shall yet break forth in thousands; and my faith is, That it shall be indeed even so; for we have found him a true Prophet amongst us, and o the Nations. And this also near his departure he was heard to desire of the Lord, That if it were possible, to forgive Brown, &c. And so let all Friends be encouraged to wait upon the Lord in the feeling of the same Spirit that was in him, (which we know is the Saints Comforter) that thereby you may be carried through all tribulations and persecutions with chearfulness, that in the end you may all receive the Crown of everlasting righteousness with him and the rest of the Saints of the most high God, and holy Prophets and Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: And so the Lord God Almighty of Heaven and Earth be with you all, and keep you all in faithfulness unto the end, Amen.
      
      
         
         
            MY Brother dear the Lord hath call'd away,
            That in this World he should no longer stay:
            Who was to many an Instrument of good,
            While in the body (in God's great Power) he stood.
            For many were from darkness by him turned
            Unto the Light, in which they were confirmed
            By the Power and Doctrine which to them was preached
            By him, through which God's true Witness was reached,
            In their dark hearts, where Satan long had reigned,
            Over whom (through God's great power) Victory's gained.
            He was a valiant Souldier of the Lamb,
            And faithful to the Lord did always stand,
            Till with his Life he seal'd his Testimony,
            (A London-Prisoner) as it's known to many.
         
         
            But now in peace with God he is sate down,
            And hath with Christ an everlasting Crown
            Of Immortality, Life and lasting joy,
            Which never shall from him be took away.
         
         
            He was intrusted with the hidden treasure
            In a large, and in an abundant measure,
            Which he dispensed to the Lambs of God;
            But to the wicked he was a Scourge and Rod.
         
         
            He fed the Babes and Children with the Word,
            Which to the Wicked was a piercing sword:
            Before him stil God's Enemies did fall;
            He never turn'd his back to them at all.
         
         
            But now he hath thus finished his course
            With joy and peace, yet's Life we do not lose:
            For oh dear Brother, thy Life I stil do feel
            Remaining with me, else I could not wel
            Remain behind thee with true satisfaction,
            Because 'twould turn upon me with reflexion.
         
         
            
            For truly can I say, My heart is fill'd
            With sorrow great, and grief is not expell'd:
            For oh! the sence of my dear brother's Love
            Remains upon me, and shall never move.
         
         
            But herein is my soul greatly refreshed,
            That thy good savour and thy Name is blessed,
            And shall remain in ages yet to come,
            When visibles standing now; is past and gone.
         
         
            But oh my brother dear Why soul did love
            Thy Life, which noting was, nor is above:
            For all tings it transcended, as to me;
            In my esteem there's nothing like't can be:
            Because it stood in that Eternity
            Which always wil remain, and never dye:
            And Ages yet to come shall tast thereof,
            And call thee blest, in whom it was brought forth.
         
         
            He was a man in whom Gods Power reigned,
            Through Faith, in which he a great Vict'ry gained
            Over Death and Hell, the Grave and Power of sin.
            And all things that were centered therein.
         
         
            He was a man in whom the fulness dwelt
            Of Grace and Virtue, was by many felt
            To live in him, and speak in Gods great power,
            And he descended as a sweet plenteous shower,
            Which did refresh the Garden of the Lord,
            The Plants that met together with one cord
            On God to wait, refreshment to receive,
            And afterward in love to take their leave.
         
         
            He was a man that was upright in heart
            Towards God and man, and hated all deceit:
            And what he was to God, there's few doh know,
            Neither can my Tongue or Pen declare or show:
            But this I say, He was  men of God,
            And in the Light of Righteousness he stood.
            
               What might I say of this my precious Friend!
            My soul lov'd him entirely to the end???
         
         
            And stil his Life is felt amongst the Lambs
            Who in the Light and Power of God doth stand:
            Here he is read, here he is felt and known
            Amongst the faithful, who with him are one.
            His savour's good, my Life's therewith refresht;
            His Name is now, and ever shall be blest.
         
         
            And now my brethren dear, and sisters all,
            In this be you refresht both great and small.
            Although our brother outwardly be gone,
            Yet hath not God the Lord left us alone;
            For his Almighty Power is with us stil,
            Which in the Light of Life you all may feel
            To your refreshment and eternal joy,
            Which no man in this World can take away.
            Here is our peace, herein our joy lasts stil,
            In which my love is to you all, Farwel,
         
         And this is my Testimony for that man of God who hath been a blessing to the Lord in his generation, and also to this Nation: And in this I have eased my Spirit, and am clear in my Conscience in the sight of God, having done that which was my duty to do.
         
            Josiah Coale.
         
      
      
         A Testimony of G. F. concerning E.B.
         HIs Name is Chronicled in the Book of Life; a righteous plant, pure, chaste, clean: Who can tax him for oppressing them, or burdening them, or being chargeable to them? who through the sufferings hath finished his course and testimony, who is now crowned with the Crown of Life, and reigns with the Lord Christ for ever and ever. And in his Ministry in his life-time, he went through sufferings by bad spirits, who never turned his back on the Truth, nor his back from any out of the Truth; a valiant Warrior, more then a Conqueror, who hath got the Crown through death and sufferings, who is dead, but yet liveth amongst us, and amongst us is alive.
         
            G. F.
         
         The End.
      
   
