<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

   
      
         
         
            
               D. IOAO. DE CASTRO THE FOVRTH VICEROY OF INDIA.
               portrait
               W. Faithorne sculp:
            
         
      
      
         
         THE
LIFE
OF
DOM JOHN
DE
CASTRO,
The Fourth Vice-Roy of
INDIA.
         Wherein are seen the Portuguese's Voyages
to the East-Indies; Their Discoveries and Conquests there;
The form of Government, Commerce, and Discipline of Warr in
the East, and the Topography of all India and China.
         Containing also a particular relation of the most famous siege of
DIO, With a Map to Illustrate it.
         BY
IACINTO FREIRE DE ANDRADA,
Written in PORTUGUESE,
AND
By Sr PETER WYCHE Kt.
Translated into English.
         
            
               .
         
         Hesio.
         London, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of
the Anchor on the Lower walk in the New Exchange. 1664.
      
      
         
         
         TO THE
QUEENS
Most Excellent Majesty.
         
            May it please your Majesty,
         
         EVery Man's way of paying his
Reverence and Devotion, being
particularly his own, and
as peculiar as any thing he
derives from his Temper; and
the Splendor of Your Majesties Vertues
and Perfections (of which to name any
first were to fail in Ceremony to the rest)
being as Glorious and Unquestionable as
Light in the Sun, who, daily Prodigal of
his Benign Aspects, is yet above being the
Theame and Subject of Praises; I have
thought it suitable to my Zeal, and first
Imployment had in Portugall, to tell my
Fellow-Subjects in plain English, the
Greatness and Glory of that Crown and
Kingdome, which are Contractedly drawn
in the Life of one particular Portuguese,

since the Ministers Actions have their
Spring in the King's Instructions, and the
Prince's Zeal makes the Subjects Apostles.
And now Madam, the Praises of your
Native Country, will come with Advantage
to the Eyes and Ears of the English,
since your Majesty, so Endear'd before, as
to make them Hope in Despair, and
Joyn (such is the Miracle of your Goodness)
in one Form of Common-Prayer
for your Happy Recovery, (when so
many thousands so Sacrifize to their own
Opinions as to be willing with their Lives
and Fortunes to pay for their Non-conformity)
will be now look't upon as the
Queen of every particular Man's choice.
The Life of the great Portuguese Dom
Iohn de Castro, Dedicated in the Original
to Prince Theodosius of Happy Memory;
Your Royal Brother, hath Suggested the
presumption of Begging for the Translation,
your Sacred and Auspitious Patronage,
which only (in so Censorious an
Age) can protect in Print, and in Safety,
         
            Madam,
            Your Majesties most Loyal Subject
and most Dutifull Servant,
PETER WYCHE.
         
      
      
         
         THE
Authors Dedication
To Prince
THE ODOSIUS,
Of Happy Memory,
Who was Heir of Portugall, and Eldest
Brother to Our Most Excellent Queen
KATHERINE.
         
            Most Serene SIR,
         
         THE Scipios have met with their
match in their Actions, not in
their Fortune; There were in
Asia Darius's for Dom John
de Castro to Conquer, in Europe
not a Curtius or Livy to propagate
his Fame. The Bishop Dom Francisco de
Castro, perswaded me to write this History,
(which the Press now publisheth) though
in a Style inferiour to the deserts of a Man,

            
            
            
            
who came to be Great amongst the Greatest,
whose Vertues blossom'd so soon, that they
seem'd rather Hereditary, then Acquir'd;
He Liv'd not out the Years of his Government,
(in which almost the same Numbers
stood for Days, and Victories) though he
was long Liv'd to his Country; short to Nature.
Yet now his Memory is under your
Highness's Protection, 'tis a question, if he
were Happier in his Life, or Posterity, being
always a Conquerour, then over his Enemies,
now over Time. I might here take an
occasion to publish your Highness's Vertues,
but an Epistle is too short, (as the Book
would have been) for such a Subject. The
general Cry of the World, is to be the Book
where all shall read them in a more impartial
Character; since our Hopes are, that your
Highness uniting to the Pleasantness of
Study, the Glory of Arms, will for Fame and
Courage be the first on the File amongst our
Portuguese Princes. God preserve the
most Serene Person of your Highness.
         
            Lisbone 15th. of March 1651.
            
            Jacinto Freire de Andrada.
         
      
      
         
         THE
PREFACE.
         1. POrtugall, given by Alphonsus the sixth King of
Castile (after a signal Victory obtained against
the Mahometans, Anno 1089.) in Dowry
with his Daughter Therasia to Count Henry,
Grand-child to Robert Duke of Burgundy, (in
Recompence of his extraordinary (though but
personal) assistance in the Battail, and to have
there so considerable a Strength, where the incursions of the Moors were
most frequent and terrible) hath been maintain'd, enlarg'd (at home and
abroad) and recovered, by Courage and Policy not below those Deserts
which got so unusual a Match and Portion for a Stranger.
         2. Count Henry took Viseu and Lamego from the Moors, yet left
Portugall with Neighbouring Frontiers, for Southward it was bounded
with the River Mondego, (infested with the Invasions of the Infidels)
Northward with the River Minho, towards the Rising Sun it had the
Province Beira, and towards the Setting, on the Sea-side the City Porto,
which being the only Port, unpossess't by the Moors, and chiefly frequented
by the French, seems more reasonably then some other Etymologies, to give
the name to the Kingdome of Portugall.
         3. Alphonsus Henriques, Son to Count Henry (as the fatal greatness
of Rome made its first King Romulus a Souldier) was not second to
any in Story, in Courage and Action; He defeated Albucaran King of
Badajos, and took the City, raised the Siege of Coimbra, besieged by King
Eujunius, with three hundred thousand men: In the year 1139. at the
Battail of Orique (where impartial and concurrent Histories count an
hundred Moors for every Christian) he overcame Ismarus and four more
Mahometan Kings, on which he was (as some affirm) after the Fight
saluted King by his own Souldiers; from that Action also, the Virgil of
Portugall Luis de Camoens (in the 53. and 54. Stanzas of his third
Canto) derives the bearing of the Arms of the Kingdome, which are
five small shields Azure, in a great shield Argent, left plain by his Father.
         
            
            53.
            Aqui pinta no branco escudo ufano,
            Que agora esta vitoria certifica,
            Cinco escudos azues esclarecidos,
            Em sinal destes cinco Reys vencidos.
         
         
            54.
            En estes cinco escudos pinta os trinta
            Dinheyros, porque Deos fora vendido,
            Escrevendo a memoria em varia tinta,
            Da quelle de quem foy favorecido.
            Em cado hum dos cinco cinco pinta,
            Por que assi fica o numero comprido;
            Contando duas vezes o do meyo
            Dos cinco azues que em Cruz pintando veyo,
         
         Which the Right Honourable Sir Richard Fanshaw late Embassadour
to Portugal, in his Excellent Translation of that Heroique Poem
thus renders,
         
            53.
            In his broad Shield which he till then wore plain,
            A badge eternal of this glorious day,
            Five small shields Azure he doth now include,
            In sign of these five Kings by him subdude.
         
         
            54.
            In these five Shields he paints the Recompence,
            For which our Lord was sold, in various Ink,
            Writing his History who did dispence
            Such favour to him more then heart could think.
            In every of the five he paints five Pence,
            So sums the thirty by a Cinque fold cinque,
            Accounting that which is the Center twise
            Of the five Cinques which he doth place Cross-wise.
         
         Though the more Venerable Testimony of a Latin Record made of the
Oath Alphonsus Henriques took in the year 1152. (before the Bishop
and Magistracy of Combra, and the Bishop of Braga) about the Vision
he saw before the Engagement, saith, he was proclamed King before the
Fight, as was fore-told by Christ, who at the same time commanded him
to take for his Arms what he paid for the Redemption of Man, and what he
was sold for to the Iews, to which the King added for his Crest Moses's
Serpent, A Type of Christ; The words under the King's Oath are,
Gentem tuam invenies alacrem ad bellum & fortem & potentem ut
sub Regis nomine in hac pugna egrediaris, Nec dubites, sed quicquid
petierint liber?? concede. Ego enim Aedificator & Dissipator Imperiorum
& Regnorum sum; Volo enim in te & in semine tuo Imperium
mihi stabilire ut deferatur nom??n meum in exteras gentes;
Et ut agnoscant succssores tui datorem Regni, insigne tuum ex pretio
quo ego humanum genus emi, & ex qno ego ?? Judaeis emptus sum,

compones: This Record also sets down a famous Prediction delivered at
the same time by an old Hermit to Alfonsus (as he then affirm'd upon
Oath) concerning the Succession, Alienation and Restauration of the
Crown of Portugall; Bono animo esto, Vinces, vinces, & non vinceris,
Dilectus es a Domino, Posuit enim super te & super semen tuum
oculos misericordiae suae usque in sextam decimam generationem in
qua attenuabitur proles, sed in ipsam attenuatam ipse respiciet &
videbit, which this Age hath seen fulfill'd precisely and to the Letter, by
the King of Spain's seising on the Kingdome of Portugall after the Death
of King Henry the Cardinal (who succeeded the unfortunate Sebastian)
the seventeenth King, and by the happy Restauration of the Royal Family
in King John the Fourth of Glorious memory, Father to our most Incomparable
Queen Katherine. This Record was found engross'd in Parchment
with five Seals annex'd in the Royal Monastery of Alcobaca, the Original
was carried to Philip the Second King of Spain, and is now in the Escurial;
there remains in Lisbone an Authentique Copy, and Dom
Antonio de Sousa de Macedo hath Printed it in the second Proeme of
his Lusitania Liberata, pag. 96, 97, and 98. This first King took
Saint Iren from the Moors, and (by the help of the Northern Fleet sent
to the Holy Land under the Command of William Long-sword) got
from them, after a long and bloody Siege, Lisbone: Afterwards Beja
and Evora, and the greatest part of the Country on the South-side of Tagus,
by the Portuguese called Allentejo, he Died in the year of our Lord
1185. of his Reign 73. and of his Age 91. a King so extraordinary
in his own Person, in the unusual length of his Life and Reign was necessary
for the fast Rooting that Monarchy, which was so gloriously to spread
it self, as far as East and West extend.
         4 Alphonsus was succeeded by his Son Sanctius the first, from whom
the Crown continued in the direct Descendency for above two hundred years,
till John the first Brother to King Ferdinand, the last of nine Kings,
who in continual Warrs had imployed their Pious and Victorious Arms in
driving the Moors out of Europe, so long so stoutly did they defend
their Possessions.
         5. King John (seeing all clear behind him) did then, Prudently
and in Compliance with that Innate hatred the Crown of Portugall had
against the Mahometans, pass over to Africa, where he took from the Moors
the City of Ceuta, as Emulous and Troublesome a Neighbour and Competitor
to Spain, as Carthage was once to Italy. After this advantage
on the Africans, his third Son the Infante Dom Henrique Commander of
the Cavalliers of Christ (an order founded by Dennis the sixth King of
Portugal against the Infidels, on the Dissolution of that of the Knights
Templers) incited by the obligation of his Office and Family, set upon the
Discovery of the Western Coast of Arabia, of which, in the expedition
of Ceuta (cujus pars magna fuit) and other passages made over
thither, he had got the best Information he could find amongst the Moors;
He began his design Anno 1420. by sending forth every year two or

three Ships, which were to pass Cape Non, the furthest of the Spanish
discoveries, and by them so named, like Hercules pillars, from their despair
of passing further; In all the Voyages of twelve years they came but
to the Cape Bojador, (so named from its Launching out) which no man
had the boldness to double, because finding that Cape to shoot out Westward
about forty Leagues further then the rest of the Coast, and at the
beginning of the Cape a Bank of Sands to run the same way, the unexperienced
and raw Pilots (used then to Sail by the Shore) durst not stand
off ix Leagues (which had avoided the Flats) and go so far Westward.
The Infante undaunted by the consideration of expence or danger,
continually set out Fleets and gave Orders to the most skilfull and stout
Commanders to adventure the passing that then so formidable Cape; In
these Voyages Porto Sancto was, after a great Storm, recovered and found
out, (and so named from the Preservation), afterwards the Island Madeira,
so called from the thick Woods upon it; with Resolute and Magnanimous
perseverance, Vast and Prodigious expence, unheard of Suffering
and Danger, he at last past the Cape, and in forty three years carried on
his Discoveries from Cape Non in twenty eight degrees and an half, of
Northern Latitude to Cape Sierra Lione in 7 3/4. of the same Latitude,
which makes on the Shore 430. Leagues. In the Sea, besides those already
mentioned, were found out in his time the Canary Islands, and those of
Capoverde; He laid the foundation of that great Design, not thought of
by any of the Antients, but Semiramis, Bacchus, and Alexander the
Great, and till now, above the narrow Souls of so many succeeding Ages;
the 13th. of November in the year 1463. was the Day of his glorious
Memory.
         6. Alphonsus the fifth, Grand-child to John the first by his Son King
Edward, (who Reigned but five years) set to Farm at a certain Rate
the Trade of Guinney for five years to Fermon Gomes, on condition,
that beginning from the Cape Sierra Lione he should every year discover
one hundred Leagues on the Coast; In January 1471. he first came to
the place in Guinney; by him called (and yet of the same name) the
Mine, and there began to truck for Gold; His discoveries fell not short
of his agreement, for they reached to Cape Saint Katherine (so call'd because
first seen on her Day) which lies in 2 and 1/2. of Southern Latitude.
From this most famous discovery of the Gold Coast he had (according to
the first rule of Sirnames) by Patent from the King given him that of
Da Mina, and for his Arms in a field Argent three Moors heads
with Gold Rings in their Ears and Nostrils, and Chains of the same about
their Necks. In this King's time were discovered in the Sea the Islands
of Saint Thomas, of the Prince, and of Anno Bon; He went Anno
1458. in Person with a Fleet of 220. Ships, and about 25000. Men,
and took Alcacer Leguer from the Moors; In a second expedition got
Anafe, in a third Arzilla and Tangier.
         7. King John the Second took the Title of Lord of Guinney, and
Built on the Gold Coast the Fortress call'd Saint George of the Mine,

thereby to take Possession of the past and intended Discoveries, and to lay
the first Stone of a Church for the Conversion of the Pagans. Diogo Cam
by his Commission came in the year 1484. to the Kingdome and River of
Congo, where (according to his Orders to raise Pillars of Stone (in
stead of Woodden Crosses used before) in the most Eminent places of his
Discoveries, fixing to them an Escutcheon Royal, and about it an Inscription
in Latin and Portuguese, declaring the King, the Time and Person
employed in the Discovery) He set up a Pillar on the South-side of the
River, (how much more Glorious then the Imaginary ones of Hercules)
which was therefore call'd Rio do Padraon, (i. e.) the River of the
Pillar; the Discovery of the Kingdome of Congo was so considerable, as
Diogo Cam returned with the news to the King, who in a little time fitted
him out again; in this Voyage he went 200. Leagues beyond Congo,
and planted two Pillars, one called Saint Augustines in 13. degrees of
Southern Latitude, another which named the place Capo do Padraon,
in 22. degrees of the same Latitude. About this time was discovered by
Fernaon Do Po the Island yet called by his Name, and the Kingdome
of Benim, whence the first Guinney Pepper came into Christendome.
         In the year 1486. there came into Portugall an Ambassadour from
the King of Penim, to desire some Priests to instruct that Kingdome in
the Catholique Religion, this Embassadour told King John, that twenty
Moneths Iourney (according to the slow Travelling of their Caravans)
Eastward of their Country was a Prince call'd Organ??, who amongst the
Pagan Princes of that Coast was esteemed as the Pope is in Europe, by
whom (according to antient Custom) the Kings of Benim were Confirmed
in their Succession to the Crown, who instead of a Scepter and a
Crown, sent them a Staff, and to wear on their Head a Cover of Copper,
like an Helmet, and a Cross to wear about their Neck; The King comparing
this Relation with what some of his Friars had heard at Jerusalem,
from the Abissines, of their Prince's being a Christian, and his Kingdome
Southward of Egypt, upon consulting with Ptolomies Mapps, and his own
Discoveries, and the distance Eastward, concluded Ogan?? to be the Presbyter
John then so much talkt off, that by his means he might get into the
Indies, and that by his Fleets following the Coast they might arrive at
Ptolomies Prasum Promontorium, now Mozambique.
         8. This Story heightning his hopes and desires of getting to the Indies,
he sent May 1487. over Land Pero de Couilhaan to endeavour that
way to come to India, and Alphonso de Paiva with Letters to Presbyter
John; the first going from Grand Cairo in the Company of some Moors
to Adem, (in the Streights mouth of the Red-Sea) thence cross'd over
to the Coast of India, and was at Cananor, Calicut and Goa; at his
return to Cairo, finding his Companion Dead, and meeting with fresh
desires of the King that he should find out Presbyter John, he went again
to the Red-Sea, and from thence got to the Court of Presbyter John,
where the welcome Ceremony of his Reception was great, but his Return was
(according to Custom there to retain Strangers) out of hope. The prosecution

of the Discoveries on the Coasts was continued by sending out a Fleet,
in 1486. under the Command of Bartholomew Diaz, he placed his
first Pillar in the height of 24. degrees Southward, in a place then named
Serra Parda, 120. Leagues beyond the last of Diego Cam's, pursuing
their Voyage they came to Angra das Vottas, which lies in 29. After
five days stay here putting to Sea again, bad weather kept them 13. days
with their Sails half-Mast high; when the Storm ceas'd, concluding the
Coast according to former Observation to run from North to South, they
stood in for the Land with an Easterly course, but being some days without
making it they went Northward, which brought them to Angra dos Vaquieras,
(North of the Cape) not having here any Intelligence for
want of an Interpreter, and the fearfull Moors leaving the Shore at the
sight of so unusual men, returning to Sea with the same course, they came
to an Island in 33 1/4. Southward, where they planted a Pillar call'd the
Cross, which also gave the name to the Island. Here the Mariners weary
and fearfull of the great Seas they found, began to complain and desire not
to be put to tempt Fortune further, but to return, having found a thing
more considerable then any of the former Discoveries, which was, That
the Land being now observed to run Northward, there must be in their
Stern some great Cape which they ought to strive to discover: The Counsel
of the Chief Officers of the Fleet rose in this Resolution, hardly granting
Bartholomew Diaz's earnest request, to hold the same Course for two or
three days, and then finding no encouragement to proceed, to Tack about;
at the end of the Limited time, they came to a River 25. Leagues Northward
of the Island of Cryz, in 32 2/3. call'd Rio do Infante, John
Infante Commander of a Ship being the first who went on Shore. Hence,
the Mariners renewing their Complaints, they returned and came in sight
of that so famous Cape, hid for so many Ages, which now did not only Discover
it self, but a new World; Bartholomew Diaz from the Storm and
Dangers he met with in doubling it, call'd it Cabo Tormentoso, but the
King at the return of the Fleet gave it the more Illustrious name of Bona
Esperanza; They returned December 1487. having in sixteen
Moneths seventeen Days discovered 350. Leagues on the Coast. In this
King's time was the Astrolabe found out by two of his Physicians, (to
whose thoughts he had recommended the Improvement of Navigation)
and one Martim of Bohemia, Scholer to the Great Regiomontanus.
         9. King John Dying without Lawfull Issue, the Kingdome came to
Emanuel Son to the Infante Dom Ferdinand, Brother to Alphonsus the
Fifth, This was that great Fortunate and only Emanuel of Portugall,
so call'd not only from being Born on Corpus Christi Day, 1469. but
from his Mothers being delivered (after a sharp and dangerous Labour)
as the Procession came before her Palace;On which 'twas said, If at Christ's Birth the Angels, at Emanuels, Christ himself assisted. He was Born, with Arms
so long, as standing upright, and holding them down, they reach't to
his Knees, on which the Astrologers concluded his coming to the Crown,
and the extent of his Dominions, according to their Axiome, Brachia
usque ad genua extenta imperare desiderant, & aliquando imperant.
Some pretend without any force to the words to apply to him the Sybilla

Cumea's Prophecie in Virgils fourth Eglogue; He began to Reign at
26. years Old 1495. and Fir'd with the high design of his Predecessours
to Sail through the Ocean to the Indies, he the next year concluded
to send the great Vasco do Gama to try for them; This year was spent
in Councils and Preparations, and in the following 1497. in the beginning
of July, an unseasonable time, (but that great Actions expect not
Opportunities) the Fleet consisting of three Ships and a Victualler, (after
a solemn Procession of Prayers and Tears and general Benediction) set
Sail, the first Land they came at was (after five Moneths) the Bay of
Saint Helena lying in 32. degrees Southward; On the 20th of December,
they doubled the Cape of Good Hope; On Christmas day they
pass'd by the Costa do Natal, not arrived at before, and so call'd, from
the time they came to it; On Twelfth day they entred into a great River,
therefore call'd Rio dos Reys; following on their Voyage they came to
another great River 50. Leagues Northward of Sofala, where the Natives
freely and friendly Convers'd with the Fleet, furnish'd them with
fresh Provisions, and told them that Eastward there were men of their
Colour who Sail'd in such Ships, whom they often saw pass by that Coast.
On which Vasca do Gama call'd the place Rio dos bons Sinaes, and set
up a Pillar there call'd Saint Raphael, with this good news and security
(the best Warrant they ever had of their Hope) they came to Mocambique,
where they were at first well received by the Xeque, after assaulted by
his Permission, and betray'd by his Pilot; Palm-Sunday they came to
Mombaza, thence went for Melinde, where they made Peace with that
King, and had from him a Pilot who carried them in 22. days cross
that great Gulf of 700. Leagues, which is betwixt this Coast of Africa
and that of Malabar; the first place he arrived at was Calecut, the
design of his Voyage and end of his Instructions, having particular Letters
and an Embassage for the Samorin (i. e.) Emperour, who (as
Portugall was inform'd) was the greatest Prince and Lord of all the
Spices of those Parts; Vasco da Gama had twice Audience of the
Samorim, setled the Trade with him, and having plac'd five Pillars in
his peculiar discovery of 1200. Leagues from West to East, returned
safe to Lisbone, 23 August 1499.
         10. The news Vasco da Gama brought from the Indies of the hopes
to recompence so many pass'd difficulties, by the propagation of the Gospel,
and the Spices and Iewels of the East, encouraged the King to set out in
the year 1500. a Fleet of thirteen Ships, under the Command Pedralvarez
Cabrall, who meeting with a Storm at Capo Verde went out to
Sea, to make sure of doubling the Cape of Good Hope, and after a
Moneths Voyage, came first to the other great Continent of America,
where (from the solemn Planting of a Cross) he named his new discovery
Sancta Cruz, but the common discourse of Interest, prevailing against
Devotion, the profit of the Wood brought from thence call'd it Brasilia.
Pedralvarez setting out from Porto Seguro, (so call'd by him from the
goodness of it) lost by foul Weather four of his Ships, in that great Ocean
between Brazil and the Cape, and after the extremities of a bad Voyage,

came but with six torn Ships to Sofala, thence Sailing along the Coast got
to Quiloa and Melinde, where he took two Pilots, with whom he cross'd
over for India, deliver'd his Letters to the Samorim, Laded two Ships
there, the rest in Cochim and Cananor, (where he began Factories)
and from those two places brought Embassadours to settle a Peace and Trade,
arriving safely with them in Portugall. After so great Discoveries, the
probability of a Trade, and a Resolution to set out every year a Fleet for the
Discovery and Commerce of India, King Emanuel enlarged the Title of
the Crown, by Styling himself Lord of the Navigation, Conquest and
Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia and India.
         11. In the year 1502. this now so great a King, knowing Protection
not to be less glorious then Conquest, made Vasco da Gama Admiral of
all the Seas in the East, and sent him with twenty Sail to the Indies, whereof
five were as a setled Fleet to continue there, to protect the new Factories,
and to go some Moneths in the year to the Mouth of the Red-Sea to hinder
the Moors of Mecca from coming out, who were the fiercest Enemies the
Portuguese had, and who most Laboured to hinder their progress in
India; for these getting into their hands the Trade of Spices, the Moors
who before furnished Christendome, by the way of Cairo and Alexandria,
fore-saw the ill consequence of their loss. This Voyage made Tributary
the King of Quiloa, placed new Factories, revenged Injuries, protected
Allies, and made the Portuguese so famous in the East, as their coming
thither was not in a few Kingdoms and Provinces taken for the Aera.
         12. The Acquisitions and Trade arrived to that height, as in the
year 1505. Dom Francisco d' Almeyda, was sent thither with the
Title of Vice-Roy, the first so eminent Title given in these Parts; with him
went divers Gentlemen to serve there, with the Obligation then begun and
always continued to stay there three years; in his Voyage he took Quiloa,
built a Fortress, and left a Commander there, burnt Mombaza, built
also a Fortress in Anchediva, he sent his Son Dom Lorenzo to find out
the Island Zeilan, and the Maldives, which he performed, and to intercept
the Moors, who after the Portuguese coming into India, and keeping
a Fleet on the Coast of Malabar, carried the Spices laded at Symatra, a
new way they had found out, South of Zeilan, and through the Islands,
whence to avoid the Coast of India they cross'd over the Gulf, till they came
to the Mouth of the Red-Sea, or Persian Gulf: Dom Lorenzo was
afterwards Kill'd in a Sea-Fight, which the Vice-Roy's Vengeance made
dear to the Infidels.
         13. On Palm-Sunday in the year 1506. Tristaond' Acunha, parted
from Lisbone with a Fleet of fourteen Sail, and on it thirteen hundred
Souldiers, after a great Mortality caus'd by a Plague which hapned among
the men, the bad Air was observed to cease, and the Sick and Infirm to
recover in their crossing the Line; in the Voyage they made Cape Saint
Augustine in Brazil, and crossing the great Ocean before they came to the
Cape, discovered the Island then named, and yet called Tristaon d'

Acuna; One of the Ships, parted from the rest by a Storm, first put in at
a Port of Madagascar, call'd Matatana, where he got so good Information
of the place, as the News put Tristaon on the Discovery, which he perfected,
and going afterwards for the Indies, in his way took from the Moors a
Fortress in Socotora.
         14. After the business of Socotora, the great Alphonso d' Alboquerque
(who came with the Fleet from Lisbone) with seven of the
Ships designed to go along the Coast of Arabia, and after so many Ages
to revenge on the Arabs their Incursions and Possessions on the Continent
of Spain; the first place he arrived at in the Kingdome of Ormus was
the City Calayate, where he accepted of their Friendship, and forc'd four
more to take his upon his own Terms, went on persuing his Victories, and
sending fear (his Harbinger) before him, till he came to Ormus, where
he made Peace with the King, upon condition to turn Tributary to the King
of Portugall, and permit him to Build a Fortress on the Island; By the
great Fleet which parted 1509. the Vice-Roy received orders to return,
and Alboquerque was possess'd of the Government, which he Eternis'd by
taking the Cities of Calicut (the greatest and most powerfull Enemy the
Portuguese had in India) and Goa, seated in the heart of India, (therefore
judiciously made the Residence of the Vice-Roys and Governours)
went in Person to Sumatra, and possess'd himself of Malaca, so famous
among the Antients for its Scituation in the Aurea Chersonesus, and
then the great Mart of all the Eastern Merchants; In the time he spent
here, he received Embassies and Offers of Friendship from the Kings of
Campar and Java, and from the King of Siam upon the Continent, sent an
Embassadour to the King of Pegu, and Ships to discover the Spice Islands
of the Maluccoes and Banda; He made the first expedition into the
Red-Sea, and entred that Streight, Coasting Arabia till he came to the
Island of Ceibam, in the middle of that Gulf, being returned from setling
Ormus, he Died full of Glory and Deserts on Ship-board, at the Barr of
Goa, in the year 1515. and his own Climaterical.
         15. The same year King Emanuel designing an honourable Repose,
for Alboquerque after so much Sweat and Toyl in Warr and Victory, had
sent Governour to the Indies Lopo Soarez d' Albergaria with a Fleet
of thirteen Ships, and Instructions to make a Fortress upon the Island of
Zeilan, whence according to his Intelligence came all the Cynamon of those
parts. At his first coming to the Island in 1518. the King of Columbo,
on the noise of the Portuguese Arms and Iustice, readily consented,
but altered by the Iealousie and Interest of the Moors of Calicut
and Malabar, was afterwards forced to yield a Fortress, and become Tributary;
In his Government Perez d' Andrade with four Ships went to
discover the Gulf of Bangala, and the Coast of China; He was succeeded
at the end of three years, by Diogo Lopez de Sequeira, who
made a Voyage to the Red-Sea, according to his Instructions from the King,
to find out the Coast of Presbyter John, he came to the Island Macua,
Inhabited by Christian Moors, and to Arquico a Fort of Presbyter

Johns, where with mutual Tears and other Expressions of Ioy was the first
solemn meeting of the Eastern and Western Christians, of which, (that
it was to come to pass) the Abissine Friers, said, they had by them, antient
Prphesies.
         16. King Emanuel Died in December 1521. after a glorious
Reign of 26. years. The first sent to the Indies by his Son King John
the Third, was he who discovered them, Vasco da Gama made Conde
da Vidigueira, he went with the second Title of Vice-Roy, which was not
given of course to those who went to Govern India, but (as the Romans
chose their Dictators) bestowed on Men of Eminent worth, or for extraordinary
Emergencies and Atchievements, so the Turks preparations at
Sues, and giving out, he would drive the Portuguese out of India, were
the cause Dom Garcia de Noronha was sent thither 1538. with the
Relief of four thousand men on twelve Ships, and the Majesty and Terrour
of the Third Vice-Roy, as our Dom John de Castro was made the
Fourth, upon his signal Victory against the King of Cambaya, and raising
the second so famous Siege of Dio.
         17. Dio famous for twice Baffling the Power and Policy of the East,
and scituated at the entrance of the Sea of India, and in the passage thither
from Africa, Arabia, and Persia, was (according to some) Built
by Alexander the Great, intended to be the Mistress of the Sea and Land,
and so called from the word , which his Flatterers gave him as the
Son of Jupiter Ammon, others (without Searching into the reason of the
Name) give it a more Ignoble beginning, by saying it was only antiently
Inhabited by Fisher-men, but afterward, like Venice grew great, rich,
and formidable; It was a constant part of King Emanuel's Instructions
to those who serv'd him in the Indies, (knowing a Fortress here would be
to India such a Curb as Argos in the hands of Strangers was once to
Greece) to try always to get footing in this place. It was accordingly
often (but in vain) attempted by all the ways force or stratagem could
suggest, but was only that, the Fortune and Grandeur of so great a King
could not atchieve; Dom John the Third, not so Covetous of the Kingdoms,
as Virtues and Victories of his Father, commanded the Governours
not to lay aside the design, without engaging for it in whatsoever expence
or difficulty, who were all so blindly obedient as to lye with great Fleets
before it, observing the places of advantage, sometimes falling on by open
Force, sometime by Design, yet all unsuccessfull; On which advice the
King ordered the Warr to be carried on in other places of Cambaya, that
by desolating his Cities, annoying his Ports, and obstructing the Trade,
that King might be forc'd to purchase his quiet by granting him a Fortress
there; The Execution of the Portuguese's Arms, and Crys of his Subjects,
brought him to seek Peace by giving, first the City Bacam, with its
Iurisdiction and Revenues to the Governour; afterwards being press'd by
so terrible an Enemy as the Mogul, and the Rebellion of his own Subjects,
he bought Protection and Assistance from the Portuguese, by giving them
leave to choose a place there, to Build a Fortress on, which Martim Alphonso

de Sofa Admiral of the Seas of India, imployed by the Governour
to compleat the Treaty, placed on the point which commands the Haven;
This was in the year 1535. It was not long before the King of Cambaia
perceived the Portuguese by their possession here to have their Feet upon
his Neck, and all the East to complain of the interruption of their Pilgrimages,
and the loss of their Trade and Commerce to Mecca, upon which
the King listned greedily to Coge-Sofar's perswasion of Besieging the
place, on the security of being assisted, by a great Fleet from the Turk, who
design'd to drive the Portuguese out of India. This Siege began (Antonio
da Silvera being Governour of Dio) July 1538. the first
Army which came against the place consisting of six thousand Horse, and
thirteen thousand Foot, under the Command of Alucan, and Coge-Sofar;
and in September, Solomon Bashaw Admiral of the Turks came to
their Relief, with a Fleet of seventy six Vessels, full of Choise men, and a
suitable preparation of all other necessaries. There was not wanting by Sea
or Land, the personal and constant gallantry of Assaults, the subtilty of
Stratagem, and uninterrupted Battery of great Guns, against a few men
taken unprovided; yet did the Enemy raise the Siege himself, at the end of
October, and the Vice-Roy Dom Garcia de Noronha found him gone
when he came to their Relief with one hundred and sixty Sail.
         17. The subjection all India was in, under the Fortress of Dio; the
old Animosities for the first Baffle received at that place, and Sultan Mahumed's
revenge for the Death of his Father Badur, kill'd by the Portuguese,
begot the second Siege of Dio 1546. the chief Story of our
History, which, (if not much prejudiced by a lessening Translation) may
probably appear one of the greatest Actions on Record. Here Envy cannot
fasten that, with which she so disparagingly blasted Alexanders Expeditions
and Conquests in Asia, That he had to do with unarm'd and unpolisht
Men, master'd to his hand by Vice and Luxury. Courage, Discipline,
Design and Arms were here in that height, as they seem'd not to be
newly learn'd in the East, and must have prevailed against any one but a
Dom John de Castro, one so singular in all Vertues as he might Cope
with any of the antient Heroes, and challenge a place in the Kalendar of
Saints, whose constant Carriage and Influence over all India, is (besides
the universal consent of History) a strong argument for some successes,
which might be otherwise startled at as improbable; if any can be so, to
that Magnanimous and Hereditary preseverance in difficulties, which we
have shew'd to be Entaild for above an Age upon the Portuguese. To
Atone the imperfections of the Translation, and help the Reader in the
passages of so famous and memorable a Siege, I have procured, (and
gratefully acknowledge it as an eminent favour) the Ma of Dio, from
his Excellency the Marquess of Sand??, now extraordinary Embassadour
in England from the King of Portugall, which I have inserted in the
proper place.
         18. The Death of our great and glorious Dom John de Castro, left
not India so destitute, but the following Governours added Conquests to

            
            
            
            
the State, Converts to the Church; King John the Third was succeeded
by his Grand-child Posthumus Sebastian, Born with such restless desires
to enlarge his Conquests against the Moors and Infidels, as his thoughts
had no other object. The wonderfull success of his Arms in the Indies, in
getting ground on his Enemies; the defence of Goa Besieged by Idalcan
with 35000. Horse, and 60000. Foot; the keeping Chaul against a
Siege of nine Moneths, re-inforc'd with one hundred thousand Foot, and
45000. Horse, managed with all the horrour, resoluteness, and policy of
Warr, and the Counsel of the most Prudent about him, could not so defend
him against the subtle perswasions of his admiring Flatterers, as to stop his
fatal Voyage into Africa, Anno 1578. where after a hard March in the
heas and deserts, (second only to that of Resolute Cato's) engaging
with incredicle numbers of the Enemies, he is by some supposed to be the
third King slain in the Battail; though others, fond of their own Grief,
and his Memory, tell compassionate and tender Stories of his disguise and
escape, and thinking, so great a Light could not go out with out its last
amasing Blaze, believe Sebastian not yet Dead.
         19. Henry the Cardinal, Son to King Emanuel, and great Uncle to
Sebastian, was on his Death by the Civillians, Nemine contradicente,
asserted King, and accordingly receiv'd by the Kingdome; his old Age,
(which allow'd him but the Reign of one Year and five Moneths) and the
Character of his Spiritual orders, (beautified in him by the chast and exemplary
Austerity of a Prince) obliged him to endeavour to settle the
Succession, by appointing a meeting of the States at Almeirim, there to
hear the pretensions of those five Rivals, who Courted the Crown; The
Competitors were,
         Antonio, Prior of Crato, natural Son to the Infante Dom Lewis,
second Son to King Emanuel, who for some Weeks carried himself as King
at Lisbone, by coyning Money, and conferring Honours, till forc'd away
by the Duke of Alva, fled to Porto, thence got into France, and in the
year 1589. (assuring Queen Elizabeth, That all the Portuguese would
unanimously acknowledge him if he got Footing there) the Fleet design'd
for the West-Indies, under the Command of Captain Drake, appeared
in his Favour, but the Portuguese answered not his expectation; His only
prejudice was his not being Legitimate.
         Raynusius Duke of Parma, Grand-child to Edward (the fourth
Son to King Emanuel) by his eldest Daughter Mary, excluded, because
the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdome, provide (in case a Daughter
Marry out of Portugall) against a Strangers pretending in her Right.
         Catharine, Dutchess of Barganza, second Daughter to Edward, but
with the Legal advantage of having Married in the Kingdome.
         Philip the second, King of Spain, Grand-child to King Emanuel by
his eldest Daughter Elizabeth, Married to the Emperour Charls the
Fifth.
         Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, Grand-child to King Emanuel
by his second Daughter Beatrix, Married to Charls Duke of Savoy.
         Philip the second, King of Spain, having chased Prior Antonio

out of Lisbone, was acknowledged King of Portugall, and went in Person
to Lisbone in June 1581.
         20. The Restauration of King John the Fourth, to the Kingdome and
Crown of Portugall, Anno 1640. is eminently observable; That the
Possession of the King of Spain for threescore years, had not made the
Portuguese loose their Courage, or Hopes to effect their desires; That the
King of Spain should make the Duke of Braganza, (whose pretences to the
Crown and affections of the People he very well knew) Grand-master of
the Artillary, who in dischage of his trust seemed to refuse the offer of
the Crown; That a secret intrusted with six hundred should not miscarry;
That the design should be perfected with only the Death of the
Secretary: And that its influence should be so general and powerfull, as
the Castillians were every where, and almost at the same time laid aside
particularly in Brazil, where they were totally extirpated; And where
afterwards the States of Holland found this policy of the Portuguese,
seconded by the Courage of their Ancestors, in taking the Reciffe in Pernambuck,
Ianuary 1654. a place the States with a Fleet of fifty Ships
had taken from the Spaniard 1630. of such consequence, That whilst
the Crowns were united in one, the Recovery of it, was the great Debate of
the Councils, attempted by the Admiral Dom Antonio de Oquendo,
1631. Afterwards for many years, by the greatest Preparations and most
eminent Persons of both Kingdomes; yet the complicated Strength of Nature,
and the Hollanders Fortifications (whom their Experience had made
the great Masters of that Art) made it impregnable against all Attaques.
The taking in of this by the Portuguese alone, when a King of
their own made them act like and for themselves, and the keeping of it
against the Force and Fleet of Count Maurice of Nassau, may at the end
of a long Preface excuse the Recital of many more performances of the
Portuguese, (after their Restauration) Notorious for the Wisdome of the
Contrivance and Gallantry of the Execution.
         
            Peter Wyche.
         
      
      
         
         
            WHITEHALL, Aug. 12. 1663.
            
         
         Let this Translation be Printed.
         
            Henry Bennet.
         
      
   
   
      
         
         THE LIFE OF
DOM IOHN DE CASTRO.
         The First BOOK.
         I Am Writing the Life of Dom Iohn de
Castro, a Man greater then his Name,
greater then his Victories; whose Memory
is yet fresh in the East, descending
from Father to Son, a successive
Book, wherein the Fame of his Actions
is preserv'd always Alive; and we will add to the general
Acclamations of his Glory this little shout, since
Records keep not so well in Tradition as Writing.
         1. Dom Iohn de Castro,The first Studies of Dom Iohn de Castro. was, a Renown'd Branch of
an Illustrious Family: But first we will tell his Vertues,
then his Stock; the Nobility a man raiseth by his
Actions, being greater then that he acquires from his
Ancestors. He spent his first Years in that Learning and
Vertue, his Age was then capable of; being so naturally
inclin'd to Learning, that he needed not be forc'd,
but only put in the way. Dom Iohn, not being the Heir
of his House, was intended for Study; Learning being
always the second Birth-right amongst the best Houses
of this Kingdome. Dom Iohn obey'd, not having then
Liberty to refuse, or a School to take another Lesson
in.
         2. He Learnt Mathematicks of Peter Nonnius,He learnt the Mathematicks. the
greatest Man Portugall knew of that Profession, and
came to be such a Master in the Science, as if he had
intended to profess it. In this School he was Companion
to the Infante Dom Lewis, whose Familiarity he

got into, both by his Quality and Ingenuity: but as
Dom Iohn embrac'd Learning out of Obedience, and
Arms by Destiny, he look'd upon the glory of the
Schools as small, finding himself intended for the Warrs,
both by his own Inclination, and by his fore-fathers
Example.
         3. The repute of Dom Edward Menezes, Governour
of Tangiers, was at that time great, whose Name the
Africans heard with terrour, and we with respect; Dom
Iohn look'd more upon his Victories, then the Schemes
and Circles of Euclid, loving the Arts only as they
waited on Courage.
         4. Being eighteen years Old,He goes to . finding himself more
grown in Spirit then in Age, making an escape, he
Embark'd for Tangiers, where (contrary to the Custom
of such places) he bore Arms nine years, as if he intended
to spend his Life, in what was only a beginning:
on all occasions, in that Warr he behaved himself with
Courage equal to his Blood, and above his Years, deserving
the joy of it from his Friends, and envy from
the Souldiery.
         5. Dom Edward de Menezes respected him,Dom Edward de Menezes Knights him, as if he
had then read in this History, his Victories in Asia we
are now Writing; he would needs with his own hands
give and receive the honour of Knighting him, being
proud so long before of this Son of his Discipline; and
considering, that so great Bravery deserv'd to be encouraged
by the favours of Princes, desiring that Valour
should have due Rewards, equally favouring the King,
and Subject, he writ to the King Dom Iohn the Third,
that Dom Iohn de Castro had so serv'd,and informs the King of his Desert. that now no
Place or Reward could be too great for him; that his
Highness ought to conferr some honour on him, because
Kings make Souldiers by taking notice of them, and
it was just, that in the sight of so great a Prince, Vertue
should not remain unrewarded.
         6. The King immediately sent for Dom Iohn,The King sends for him, and rewards him by so
honourable a Letter as if he had intended him no other

recompence, with that Dom Iohn came to the Court,
where he was as much Envy'd for his wounds as for the
favour shown him; The King made him Commendatory
of Salvaterra, awaking Deserts in others by the
Value he had for them in him.
         7. Dom Iohn spent some time in Court,His behaviour at Court. without
being drawn away to any youthfull Vice, either by his
Years, or Example, appearing truly a Man all along,
taking so well his Measures, that neither his Maturity
made him ill-humour'd, nor his Civility facil: He knew
how to play the Philosopher amongst the Varieties of
the Court; shunning in that kind of Life what had
any shew of Idleness, not any thing that arguesd Discretion.
         8. He altered his course of Life by Marrying the
Lady Leonore Coutinho,He marries Leonore Coutinho. his Cousin German once removed,
the Daughter of Leonel Coutinho, a Gentleman of
the Illustrious House of Marialva, Nobility so known
and so auntient, that our knowledge of that and the
Kingdome bear both the same Date: He had no other
Portion but the Qualities and Vertues of his Bride; yet
without the propps of an Estate, did so maintain his
Honour, that he was by all treated with the respect of
a Rich, and the pitty of a Poor man.
         9. Then presented it self the Battail of Tunis,The Battail of Tunis. an
Action more famous for the Victory, then Advantage,
in which, Dom Iohn de Castro had no little share, in the
Honour of Danger. We will give a larger relation of
its success, The King Dom Iohn having engaged in it
his Forces,The occasion of it. the Infante Dom Lewis, his Person. That
notorious Rover Barba-Rossa had infested all the Mediterranean
with more Strength and Boldness then is
ordinarily heard of in a Pirat, finding Fortune so ready
to assist his Daring, that, amidst the Triumphs of Charls,
only Barba-Rossa was the scandal of his Victories; Seeing
himself every day more advanc'd in Opinion, and
Forces, he went to serve the Turk, with whom, the
report of our injuries had given him credit; and buying

his favour with the most Valuable things he had, got
to be Admiral of the Seas; coming often with great
numbers of Gallies, he very much infested the Ports of
Naples and Sicily; the Valour of the Natives, or the
Protection of the Empire, (to which they were Vassals)
not being able to defend them; He made Slaves of
ifinite numbers, (whereof divers truckt their Faith for
their Liberty) laid waste Provinces, and burnt Ships,
getting a very great Name amongst the Infidels, by the
miseries of the Christians, till forgetting his beginning,
his Prosperity made way for his ambition of Reigning,
and he usurp'd the Kingdome of Iunis by diverse Artifices,
which Story beongs not to our History. Charls,
looking upon this Tyrant, having so much force of his
own, that he was abetted by a far greater Power, and
that his Kingdoms lying so near, it was not fit he should
root himself at the Gates of his House; that the Moors
(who wanted not alour, but Discipline) being set
on work by so experienc'd a Souldier, would come to
know their own Strength to the prejudice of his Kingdoms;
resolv'd with a very strong Navy to find him
out, and to divest him of the Protection of Tunis,
because at the best scaping from thence he must to
Sea again, where, as a Pirat, he could only offend with
stragling Forces, which the weather, and fortune, might
more easily Destroy. He drew his old Souldiers from
the Garrisons of Italy, (whom he suppli'd with new)
made great Leavies in High Germany and Flanders,
Listed Italians and Spaniards, besides Gentry and Nobility
which serv'd without Pay, and the Enterprise being
so usefull and justifiable, and where the Emperour
ventur'd his own Person, there came many Voluntiers
to joyn with so pious and valiant Arms. The Emperour
Mustered the men he rais'd, in Sardinia, and found five
and twenty thousand Foot on the List who received
Pay, besides very many others who serv'd without it,
who made up a great part of the Army; every day he
receiv'd diverse Succours which increast his Camp.
         
            
10. The Infante Dom Lewis,The Infante Dom Lewis is there in Person. a Prince worthy of designs
matching his Courage, resolv'd to accompany the
Emperour his Brother-in-law in the expedition, and
though very much disswaded by the King Dom Iohn,
with diverse Arguments, some taking in his affection
to a Brother, others the care for his Person; yet the
Infante apprehending the King's inclinations forwarder
to excuse his Courage, then to accept his Obedience,
did with some Gentlemen depart privately; which
when the King knew, he sent him to Barcellona (where
the Emperour then was) large Credit, and ordered
the Equipping 25 Carvels, and some other Ships, amongst
the restThis was the Vessel which in the invasion 1588. was cll'd the Caca-foogo. one Galleone, which carried two
hundred Brass pieces; the greatest that till then ever
Rode in our Seas: that, under the Command of Antonio
de Saldanha, they might be in readiness for the
Fight, and out of respect to the Infante all the Vessels
of the Fleet were entrusted with Gentlemen of eminent
Quality, of whom Dom Iohn de Castro was one,
who in this Action did equally despise Danger and Covetousness,
as will presently appear by the ensuing relation.
         11. Those Gentlemen who Embark'd in this expedition,Gentlemen who were at the Fight.
and who are come to my knowledge, were
(besides Dom Iohn de Castro) Dom Affonso of Portugall,
Son and Heir of the Earl of Vintioso, Dom Affonso
de Vasconcellos, Son of the Earl of Penela, Lewis Alvarez
de Tavora, Lord of Mogadoura, with his Brother
Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, who was afterwards Vice-King
in the Indies, Dom Iohn de Almeyda, Son of the Earl of
Abrantes, Dom Pedro Mascarenhas, who also was Vice-King
in the Indies, Dom Diogo de Castro Governour of
the Castle of Evora, Dom Fernand de Noronh, Dom
Fraucisco de Faro, Dom Francisco Pereira, Embassadour
from King Dom Sebastian to Castille, Dom Affonso de
Castelbranco, Lord High Bailiff of Portugall, Pero Lopez
de Sousa, Iohn Gomez de Sylva, Page of the Lance,
and Dom Lewis de Attayda, afterwards Earl of Attouguia,

and Dy'd in the Indies, being the second time Vice-King
there. All these Gentlemen serv'd at their own
Charge, carrying with them Servants and Souldiers
without any pay; their Cloaths also and Liveries
show'd with what delight they went to the Warr. All
the Fleet came to Anchor in the Port of Barcellona, and
saluting the Emperour's Admiral, made a warlick and
pleasing sight. The Emperour came to the Portugall
Embassadors House, (Alvaro Mendez de Vasconcellos)
which being on the Sea-side was fitter to honour and
entertain the Entry.
         12. The Dukes of Alva and Cordova, with many
other Lords, came to the Sea-side to find out the General,
and the Gentlemen with him, they all went to
Kiss the Emperour's hands, who received them with all
the honour and welcome befitting his place, very glad
to be accompany'd with our experienc'd and stout
Souldiery, to whom the half Moons, and Lances of
Africa were no strangers. The Emperour acquainted
the Infante Dom Lewis with all his weighty Resolutions,
not only out of respect to the greatness of his Person,
but to that of his Judgement, well seen both in Court,
and State; of whom I must here tell a pass of Civility,
for the valew the Castillians put on it.Civility betwixt the Emperour and Infante. The Emperour
and the Infante were together one Night, and at the
going in of a Door both Complemented for the precedency,
the one would have the Stranger go foremost,
the other would put it upon Majesty; The Emperour
taking him by the Arm forc'd him to enter first,
The Infante not willing to accept the honour, nor able
to refuse it, snatch'd a Torch from a Page. The Infante
knew so well how to please the Emperour, as he resolv'd
to give him the State of Milan, finding in him
Qualities to deserve it, Valour to defend it. But the
claims of France, made the Dominion of that State so
uncertain, as it lay many years under the Decision of
Arms.
         13. I will not tell the success of that Warr, because

the Story is from my purpose, though Dom Iohn de
Castro behav'd himself so in't,The Emperour would have Knighted Dom Iohn de Castro, who refus'd it. as the Emperour would
fain have Knighted him; an Honour, from which he
justly excus'd himself, as having had it before from other
Hands, which, though not so Royal, suppli'd that defect
by their stoutness. The Emperour Commanded two
Thousand Crusades should be given to every Captain of
the Fleet,A Crusade worth 3 s. 8d. which Dom Iohn alone accepted not, serving
more Ambitiously for Renown than Reward.As the reward of Money.
         
         14. Charls now Triumphing, like an other Scipio,
after the Warr of Africa, saw Himself at rest, amidst
the Applause and Acclamations of Europe, styling himself
more fitly the Founder, than the Heir of his Empire.
Our Fleet return'd to the Port of Lisbone, where
Dom Iohn found in the Embraces of the King, and
Salutations of the People, a greater reward than he
had refus'd from Cesar; and as one who knew how to
despise his own Fame, he retir'd to his Country House
at Sintra,He retires to Sintra. desiring to Live to himself, having so carry'd
himself in his Country's Service, that he neither forsook
it, as an Unprofitable, nor Courted it as an Ambitious
Person: Here he past his time in a strange and new
kind of Husbandry, Cutting down Fruitfull Trees, and
Planting in their stead Wild and Barren ones; by this
perhaps shewing, that in all he did he was so dis-interess'd,
that from the Earth he Till'd he look'd for no
return of benefit: but 'tis not much, if he so little
valew'd what the Rocks of Sintra could produce, when
he scornfully Trampled upon the Rubies and Diamonds
of the East.
         15. Dom Iohn in the prime of his Age, found himself
put upon Service by the Examples of his ownHe goes the first time for the Indes.
Family; and, as the Warr in Africa, by the new Conquests
in the East,See Iohn de Barro's History of India, Decade 5. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. No. 10. was either slighted or forgot, (the
World most Valewing the Fame which is far fetch'd)
He resolv'd to go for the Indies, whose Conquests
stored the Kingdome with Glory and Victories; He
went on Board, without asking any employment or

reward, counting that Honour more his own he went
to winn, than that he might carry with him.
         16 In that expedition, Dom Garcia de Noronha, his
Brother-in-law, went Governour to the Indies, who
look'd upon Dom Iohn de Castro as one fit to succeed
him, though he then past but for a private Souldier;
as soon as the King knew Dom Iohn's resolution,The King profers him a Reward, and ow he accepts it. he
ordered him a Thousand Crusades yearly all the time
he serv'd in the Indies, and by his Letters Patents the
Government of the Fortress of Ormus, which he, I
know not if with greater ambition or temper,Ibid. refus'd;
the Memory of rewards rejected being rarer than of
those accepted: an Action more easily prais'd than
imitated.
         17. Dom Iohn de CastroHe carries his Son Dom Alvaro. took Shipping with his Son
Dom Alvaro then about thirteen, giving him for the
pass-time of that Age the Dangers and Tempests of so
long a Voyage. Dom Garcia's Fleet arriv'd prosperously
at the Indies, where he found the Governour Nuno de
Cunha going with a Fleet to the relief of Dio, and to
Fight the Turks Galleys which lay before it; in that
famous siege, Antonio de Sylveira held out. Dom Garcia
at once with the possession of the Government took
on him the Obligation of succouring the place, in
which service Dom Iohn de Castro offer'd himself,He embarks himself for the relief of Dio. and
as a Souldier of fortune earnest upon't, put himself on
the first Ship, as if he fore-saw those future Triumphs
Dio call'd him to: but the retreat of the Turks lost
Dom Garcia the Victory, or rather gave it him without
Blood-shed, if less glorious, more secure.
         18. Dom Garcia Dy'd in a little time, to whom succeeded
Dom Estevaon da Goma, one who had in the
Indies the Reputation of his Family,History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 7. Cap. 1. and was likely to
have had the Fortune, had not his Government been
so short; He engag'd in an Action, great in the danger,
and the glory of it, which was to pass the streight of
the Red-Sea, and burn the Turks Galleys which were
Building at Sues, with intent (as 'twas given out) to

drive the Portugues out of India: a design the Turk
thought worthy his Power.
         19. When all the Fleet was under Sail, there was not
any Souldier of Courage not inspirited by the hazard
of so extraordinary an action of as much Fame in the
undertaking as Victory.History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 7. Cap. 5. Dom Estevaon de Gama set
Sail with twelve great Ships, and sixty small Boats the
first of Ianuary 1541. here Dom Iohn de Castro had the
Command of a Gallione, and pursuing their Voyage
with Easterly winds, they all, though scattered, saw the
Coast of Arabia. The Governour Dom Estevaon da
GamaHe goes to the Red-Sea with Dom Estevaon d Gama. made it about Monte Felix, and arriv'd at the
mouth of the Streight, expected the other Ships of his
Convoy; here they had notice that the Enemies
Galleys were drawn on shore,Ibid. and so watch'd that there
was no Burning 'em without open force; which (for
the Flats and Shelves of that Port) would be impossible
to our Round-bottom'd Ships. Yet Dom Estevaon
da Gama slighting the advice and danger, went forward
with some small Barks, (one of which, Dom Iohn de
Castro, (leaving his Ship) Commanded.)Ibid. They past by
the Primero Islands, which lye in twelve degrees and ??
and by the Bay of Velha which is in almost thirteen,
they Anchord in the Bay of Fortune, which is in the
same heighth. In all the Creeks and Bays from the
mouth of the Streight to Sues, was Dom Iohn taking
the height of the Sun, and making a Journal, discoursing,
sometimes like a Natural Philosopher, sometimes
like a Sea-man; showing how blind the bare Experience
of Pilots is, without the rules of Art; here with
as much Judgment, as he had Courage, he Learnedly
canvas'd the Reasons why the Red-Sea was call'd so,
and the Natural causes of the over-flow of Nile in the
Summer; a Theme which hath kept many Wits awake,
yet hath Nature for so many years kept her own secret;
but we reckon as the least part of this Mans greatness,
that which the Romans with so swelling Rhetorick
write of their Cesar, that he manag'd a Pen as Judiciously,

as he did a Sword Couragiously. This and other Tracts,
(of which we promise you more Light) writ at Sea
in Storms and Winds, he Dedicated to the Infant Dom
Lewis,Ibid. presenting him with the Fruits of that Learning
they suck'd in together.
         20. From this Harbour they had a sight of Mount
Sinai, where the Angels laid the Reliques of St. Katherine
in a famous Repository of their own Building;Dom Estevaon Knights Dom Alvaro.
at the sight Dom Estevaon da Gama Knighted Dom
Alvaro de Castro, who in memory of so great a Sanctuary
took for his Crest the Katherine-wheel, which
his Family doth Religiously give to this day;History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 7. Cap. 8. we will
give no particular account of that design, because
the Vigilancy of the Turks hindered it from taking
effect.
         21. Dom IohnDom Iohn returns to the Kingdome. returning to the Kingdome, (as if
designedly giving the Palms of the East time to grow,
which were afterwards to Crown his Victories)
brought no other Riches on shore but the Fame of his
Actions; and being yet in his Sea-cloaths, (those too
scarce dry) was by the King chosen to be Admiral of
the Navy of the Coast;Is made Admiral of the Coast. putting him on new Employment
in recompence of his former Services. Dom Iohn
immediately put to Sea in the year 1543. to Convoy
those Ships which were expected from the Indies, and
plying too and again in his Station, spy'd a French
Corsaire, who had with seven Ships infested those Seas,
and had made Prize of some of ours, which had Embolded
and Enrich'd him; as soon as Dom Iohn saw
him, with his Fleet before the Wind he made up to
him, and setting on the Enemies Admiral, Boarded
him,Defeats seven Ships of the Corsaires. and after a brave Defence made him yield, two
Ships he sunk, the rest by the advantage of the Night
sav'd themselves; the Circumstances of this Fight are
not to be found in Writing, the Carelesness of other
excusing our silence.
         22. Dom Iohn in a few days saw our Ships,Brings in the Indian Fleet. when by
Saluting one the other they rejoyc'd for the overthrow

of the Corsaire; they came together over the Barr of
Lisbone, the applause of his reception being so general,
that he seem'd to have already weathered the storms
of Hatred, or Envy; an Happiness, or Misery, which
Great men in their Graves only purchase or avoid: In
this success Dom Iohn had no other reward than that
of the Victory; for when the Debt is great, Kings, not
to be thought Niggards, chuse rather to appear Ungratefull,
being more willing to confess the Vices of
their Person, than their Majesty.
         23. 'Twas but a little time Dom Iohn had to rest in
the content of his Victory, being forc'd for a business
of greater moment, to put on his Arms again, as I will
(though against my Custom) more largely relate, taking
it higher, not to Disjoynt the History. That famous
Pirat Haradin Barba-Rossa, found himself almost
quite broken with the loss of Tunis and Goleta, and
more after the loss of his Galleys, losing by Land the
power of a Tyrant, and by the Sea the strength of a Pirat;
yet was not this Arch Enemy so much shaken, but that
Italy many years after sighed under his Lash; He had
laid up in diverse places the best part of his Booty, as
an other plank to save himself upon; this he presented
to Solyman the Grand Signior, of Valew enough, to
efface, or excuse, the disgrace of his Fleet, and Flight at
Tunis; which was yet fresh in Solymans grief, and memory;
withall represented what he could do against
the Christians, that taking the Sea at first with only
two Galliots ill fitted out, his Valour and Success had
made him so formidable and powerfull, that with their
own spoils he entertain'd them with a sharp Warr, that
the Jaols of Africa would not hold the Slaves; that
in the Kingdome of Naples, in all Apulia, and the Terra
de Lavoro, he had committed such Out-rages, that
neither their Blood, or Tears were yet dry; that the
Galleys of Sicily out of fear rotted at Anchor; That,
that Andrea Doria (so much sought to by the Princes of
Europe) could not but confess how oft he was forc'd

to Row for't, to escape Barba-Rossa, that he fear'd not
to Cite his Enemies witnesses of his Actions; that
the Emperour Charls (Nettled with so many Losses,
seeing Barba-Rossa only over-cast his Victories) did
more like the impatient Man, than the Souldier, joyn
all the Forces of Germany, Italy, Spain, and Flanders,
to Destroy him, rashly exposing the best of his Kingdoms,
to the chance of his either losing or getting the
Day, and though his Old Fortune left him not, he only
got the credit of the Battail without any proit, (for
Dispossessing one Enemy of Tunis, investing an other
in't) neither was the Victory so entire that it Cost him
not Ships and Men, and with the expence of so great
a force he had exhausted the Exchequer of Spain; that
now was the true time to ruine Christendome, weakned
with a great Warr, and grown careless with a seeming
Victory; that in the Streight of Gibraltar was the
famous City of Ceita, (the Port whence heretofore
the Africans with Victorious Arms entred on their
Conquest of Spain) which the Portuguese held with
weak Walls, and a poor Garrison, more bent upon Disturbing
their Neighbours, than securing themselves from
'em, because heightned with their prosperity in the
East, they slighted things at home, like Rivers that are
largest at their greatest distance from their Spring-head;
that if the Grand Signior's Majesty were inclinable
to bring under his Dominion that so considerable
a part of Europe, He would underatake with a reasonable
number of Galleys to possess him of Ceita; by
which those who were farthest West should Live in
awe of his Empire. Thus discourst the Corsaire, endeavouring
with an others force to recover the Credit and
Station from which he was fall'n. And as in Princes
Courts, great Designs more than possible are listned to,
and Barba-Rossa's Experience and Valour had so good
security, proud and warlick Solyman began to give ear
to a defign of so great Importance, and so well laid for
the peace and prosperity of his Empire: He willingly

heard Barba-Rossa perswading him that the Benefit of
this Action would out-weigh the Difficulty; The
Moors of Africa too kindled the Turks indignation,
who Lamented they could not breath quietly in peace
with us, some bewailing their lost Liberty, others the
Effronts of their Prophet in their ruind Mosques; for the
remedy of these grievances, they strive to engage
the Turk upon his Zeal, and Greatness, which Motives
concerning Religion, and Majesty, might veil over
the Ambition, and justifie the Action.
         24. Charls the Emperour Sollicitous what Barba-Rossa
did in Constantinople,The Emperour adviseth the King. knowing that that Stock
(whose Branches he had Lopt) was not so Dry, but
that it might with anothers warmth, produce fresh
Poison, did all he could to know what the Turk resolv'd
about the invasion of Spain, and though the first
Blow was aim'd at Ceita, yet (Victory never stopping
where it begins) and unwilling to be crush'd in our
ruins, He ordered the providing of Ships, Listing men,
and the doubling those Garrisons which were in the
Ports of the Streights mouth, writing to the King Don
Iohn his Brother-in-law the News he had, that they
might joyntly provide for the resisting the common
Enemy.
         25. The news coming to Portugall, the King immediately
fell upon Fortifying Ceita, whose Defence was
only after the rate of those Times; and we being
Conquerours in Africa, kept our Garrisons by our
Neighbours fear. Dom Affonso de Noronha was then
Governour of Ceita,Desires aid of him against the Turk. who was by the King entrusted
with the Fortifications, and had sent him Men, Materials,
and Engeneers. The Emperour desir'd the
King, that our Fleet might come forth and joyn
with his at Cales, under the Command of Don Alvaro
Bacaon, and so expect the Enemy in the Streights
mouth, where, happen what would, the protection
of his Ports would secure their Retreat; upon Debate,
the joyning of the Fleets seem'd reasonable, that

all the weight of the Warr might not lye upon our
Forces.
         26. The King was busie in finding out one to Command
the Fleet, and though there were men enough
in our Kingdome, whom the Experience and Dangers
of our Conquests had made Souldiers, yet Dom Iohn
de Castro's Name made it self room amongst the first;
t'was his Pride neither to ask or to deny any Service
for his Country: We know that though King Iohn
lov'd his Valour, he car'd not for his Right, so that
what he got by one Virtue, he lost by an other; and
we observ'd not that he had any Place or Preferment
about the King, because so free a Spirited man might
be endured as a Subject,The King maks Dom Iohn General. not as a Favorite. The Fleet
was ready to Sail, a great part of the Nobility of the
Kingdome on Board, and the Souldiers expecting who
should Command in so considerable an Expedition,
when on a sudden Dom Iohn de Castro was nam'd to be
the Man, to the general satisfaction even of his Competitors.
         27. The King sent for Dom Iohn, acquainting him
with the News from the Emperour, and with the Designs
of the Turk, expressing to him with what Envy
he sent him upon so Honourable an Employment; but
since it was the Royal Prison of Kings, to conferr Honour,
and not to be in a condition to deserve it; He
entrusted him with that Fleet, in confidence he would,
with the Arms of the Castro's quarter the Banners he
wonn from the Turks; and leave them more Honourable
to his Posterity, than he receiv'd them from his
ancestors; Dom Iohn kist the Kings hand with a sence
of his Favours, knowing how much better it was to be
esteem'd, than countenanc'd by Princes.
         28.He joyns with the Emperours General. On the Twelfth of August 1543. all the Fleet
set Sail, and in few days with favourable Winds came
in sight of Gibraltar, where they found the Emperours
Fleet at Anchor, which receiv'd ours with all the Ceremony
of the Sea, by their often repeated Salutations

Rejoycing and Affrightnings of the place. Dom
Alvaro Bacaon with the Chief Officers of the Fleet,
came presently to Visit Dom Iohn de Castro on Board,
where (when the Complements were ended) he
gave him an account of what he heard of the Enemy,
and that according to Intelligence, his first Onset
would be upon Ceita; they then fell upon't, that the
Fleets of two such great Princes being joyned, it lay
upon both their Honours to Fight the Enemy,They discourse about the Battail. though
he should be much stronger; that we Fought in our own
Seas, and in sight of our own Ports, which would be
able in the Fight to furnish us with fresh men, and our
battered Ships would have a refuge at hand; that
though the Turks should get the Victory, they would
be so broken, as not to be able to set upon any place
in the Streight, which, by Fighting, let the success be
what it would, they should secure; Besides, the Orders
they had under Seal to find out the Enemy, could not
be understood otherwise with safety to their Honour
and Obedience. Having taken this so precise and bold
Resolution, the Souldiers were all on Fire, and the
Chief Commanders Sollicitous in giving out their Orders,Resolve to Fight.
and disposing for so great an Affair; when on a
suddain advises came thick, that Barba-Rossa with his
whole Fleet was coming towards the Streight. Dom
Iohn de Castro presently sends for his men who were on
shore, Commands the Captains to fit and trim their
Ships, and sends word to Dom Alvaro he was weighing,
who coold of his first heat by an imaginary fight of the
Enemy, writ to Dom Iohn,The Spanish General changeth his mind. that new accidents must
have new Counsails; that by the Spies intelligence, he
knew Barba-Rossa's Fleet was double to the Armados;
that 'twas neither according to the Intention or for the
Service of their Princes, to lose themselves in so apparent
a Danger; that while their Fleets were entire,
the Enemy could undertake no great matter,Endeavours to bring off Dom Iohn. and if
in the Fight they should have the worst of't, all the
places of the Streight would be the reward of the Victory;

that 'twas much against his humour to desist
from Fighting, but the Service of Cesar was to be minded
before the Gallantry of particular Persons; that he
desir'd him to bring all his Fleet into Port, and as the
Turk mov'd, they would more safely conclude what
was to be done.He persists in Fighting with the Turks. Dom Iohn de Castro answer'd the Spanish
General, that he alter'd not his Opinion at the fight
of the Enemy, that their appearing timorous would
encourage the Turks, whose design being to get footing
in Spain, the Fleets ought out of honour to engage,
much more out of a sense of the Effront; what would
the World say, if the Forces of two such great Princes
joyn'd only to manage a defensive Warr against Barba-Rossa,
letting the Turkish Banners Lord it in our Seas,
in sight of the Eagles of the Empire, and the Cinques
of Portugall; that he was resolv'd to expect the Enemy,
not fearing to be Blam'd however the day went, because,
if worsted, lost men answer'd nothing, and no
body would call Conquerours to question.
         29. But neither had this Resolution force enough
to sway the Spanish General Dom Alvaro Bacaon; we
are not certain whether he thought it the better or
the more secure way.And stays for 'em three days in the Streight. Don Iohn de Castro put himself
in the Streights mouth, where he lay three days: here
he had advice, that the Enemies Fleet steered another
course, by Dissentions of the Chief Officers, or (as
other Memorials have it) Barba-Rossa had received
new Orders from the Turk, to bring back the Fleet;
yet the Gallantry of Dom Iohn de Castro's staying in the
Streight, deserv'd envy from the Living, glory from
Posterity, since for the obtaining a memorable Victory,
not Courage, but Occasion was wanting; though this
so generous resolution was diversly tax'd in Spain, those
Branding it, who call all extraordinary actions Temerity;
yet I believe, those who most condem'd it, would
have been content to have it themselves.
         30. Dom Iohn seeing, by the Enemies retiring, those
places above their fear, went to Ceita, to communicate

some part of his instructions to Dom Affonso Noronha,
who receiv'd him with so many Shot, as the Spaniards in
Gibraltar thought the Fleet had been engag'd, yet
would they not weigh Anchor and come forth; so
alterable were they in their first, so firm in their
second resolution. Here Dom Iohn had news that the
Moors had laid close siege to Alcacere Ceguer,He sends his Son to relieve Alcacere Ceguer. a place our
men kept in Africa at an unnecessary charge and danger;
the Governour was a Gentleman of the Family
de Freitas, he immediately sent his Son Dom Alvaro
with part of the Fleet, and Orders to put relief into
the Town, and to continue in the Port till the Enemy
sail'd out first, which he did, providing the place with
Victuals and Ammunition; and the Moors Army consisting
of Hot-headed men, the heat of their first Onset
being cool'd,He returns to Lisbone, and retires to Sintra. they rais'd the siege. Dom Alvaro return'd
to the rest of the Fleet, which, (having secur'd
Ceita, and freed it from fear of the Turks) return'd to
Lisbone, where the Fame of both his adventures was
arriv'd before, which was the greater, by lighting on
Valour so unquestionable; but Dom Iohn who counted
nothing great, and despis'd his own Actions, avoided
popular applause by retiring to Sintra, either out of
Modesty, or Hight, not Valewing any thing he did worthy
of himself.
         31. The King Dom Iohn was about finding out one
to Govern the State of India, Martin Affonso de Sousa
having staid out his Time, and instantly desiring a Successour,
the affairs of the East, upon diverse Emergencies
declining, and he unwilling that the glory of his
Actions should be foil'd by a mis-carriage in the Warr,
very well knowing that the Peoples ignorance might
occasion such a disgrace as might discredit many Victories;
for so considerable an employment, the King
look'd upon men differently qualified, upon some, who
for the antiquity of their Blood, without respect to
their Deservings, us'd to Inherit the great places, a
second piece of Tyranny of the Nobilities invention,

upon others, who were mean in their Birth, but famous
in Themselves, who lost what was due to their Merits,
because others had none; so as for so eminent an employment
deserts not well Born, or a bare Title would
not do.
         32. The King on these reasons irresolv'd whom to
chuse to trust with-the weight of so great a Government;Is propos'd by the Infant fo Governour in the Inlies.
ask'd the Infant Dom Lewis, whom, (as affairs
now stood) He should make Governour in the Indies:
He told him the opinion he had of Dom Iohn de Castro's
Temper, that, though in the business of the Streights,
many thought he had behav'd himself too Daringly;
yet 'twas certain, there's no Souldier but would be glad
to have been guilty of so Honourable a fault; that,
though those who envy'd him, accus'd him of being
High and Cynical, because he begg'd no Rewards, or
Courted the Ministers of State, these faults were of so
good a kind, that Dom Iohn's Vices might be more Valew'd
than others Virtues;See Iohn de Barro's Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 1. Fol. 1. that he knew none but Dom
Iohn de Castro, who could keep up the first Discipline
of the Indies, who serv'd so unconcern'd for his own
interest, as if he despis'd all earthly Rewards, and his
Majesty were not a King of Men, but a God of Vassals;
that he did very much love Dom Iohn de Castro for his
Qualities, but so impartially, that he should Valew
his Deserts (though separated from his Person) in
any other.
         33. The King, (with whom the Infant's opinion
had no little credit, seeing him prize Dom Iohn with
a Zeal for his Prince, and Knowledge of his Friend)
lik'd the Hint the Infant gave him,The King chuseth him, and speaks to him. (whose Authority
too had an influence over the minds of others) and
sending for Dom Iohn de Castro to Evora, where the
Court was, in the publick Hall, told him, I have of
late been Sollicitous to provide one whom I might
send Governour to the Indies, and was of opinion I
might find him in the Family of the Castros, from
whose Stock the Kings my Predecessors have always

tane Generals for their Armies, and Regents for
their Provinces; I too flatter my self that the Fruit
of so generous a Root cannot degenerate; and that
the rather, by guessing what you will do by your
former Actions, which have given you so just a repute
in the Kingdoms opinion, and my esteem, and for
which I confidently put into your hands the Government
of the Indies, expecting that you will so carry
your self there, as I may give what you do, for a pattern
to those who succeed you. Dom Iohn kist the
King's hand, better pleas'd with the Honour, than the
Employment, in so great a charge only Valewing the
not seeking it: There were diverse Opinions in the
Court about this Election, some found fault with it
out of Envy, others out of Custom, and where they
could not tax any Defect in parts, they charged the
excess; yet was it so lik'd of the most, and best, that
the King was glad he had pitch'd upon one, who so
much pleas'd every one.
         34. The King gave him Orders presently to provide
the Fleet, not letting any Body else have to do with it,
as is falsly writ by one Author, who tells us, that Dom
Iohn went Discontented to the Indies, because he was
not Comply'd with in some particulars; a thing so
thwarting our certain information, and the little ambition
of this Gentleman, who was more busie in what
to deny, than what to ask, as if the King had met with
one he was not to entreat but obey.
         35. He resolv'd to carry with him his Sons,He finds fault with his Sons rich Cloaths. Dom
Fernando, and Dom Alvaro, who being the Eldest, had
bespoke some rich Cloaths, allow'd of by his Years and
Quality; Dom Iohn passing by chance through the
Iubiteria,A street in Lisbone where the Whole-salemen sell Cloaths. saw a pair of Embroidered Breeches hang out,
and stopping his Horse ask'd whose they were? the man
answering, that Dom Alvaro the Governours Son of
India bespoke 'em, Dohn Iohn ask'd for a pair of Cisers,
and cut 'em in pieces, leaving this word with the Master
of the Shop: Bid the Boy buy Arms. We read not

that the Discipline of the old Romans was more exemplary
or severe.
         36. Dom Iohn quickly made ready the Fleet,The Ships and their Commanders. without
the oppression and complaints of the Poor, the
Extorsion which great Officers carry out by their
Princes favour, being then not us'd, or not known; the
main of the Fleet was six great Ships, on which went
two thousand paid men. The Admiral call'd the Saint
Thomas, on which the Governour went, who gave her
that name which he afterwards call'd upon in the Field,
justly imploring the protection of the Apostle of the
Indies in all his undertakings; the other Captains of
the Convoy, were Dom Ieronimo de Menezes, Son and
Heir of Dom Henrique, Brother to the Marquiss of
Villa Real; Iorge Cabral, Dom Manoel da Silveyra, Simaon
de Andrade, and Diego Rebello.
         37.What time they set Sail. All the Fleet set Sail the seventeenth of March
1545. and in a few days they had been at Sea, 'twas
told the Governour, that in his Ship there were about
two hundred who had their allowance of Diet, and
nothing to do there; some were not receiv'd because
useless, others were offenders who got on Board by
stealth: The Officers were importunate with the Governour
to put them on Board the Hospital Ship, so to
rid his own, and keep their Provisions for the Casualties
of so long a Voyage; but the Governour (more Compassionate
than Cautious, making his and the poor mens
case the same) follow'd on his course; in a little time
Provision began to be scarce, on which the Mariners
and Souldiers were forc'd to complain of the Governour,The Governours compassion.
who with so Venturous compassion would to
save a few, hazard all; most were of opinion to Land
those men on the Cape de Verde Islands, where the
Ofenders would be out of the reach of Justice, and
the Necessitous kept from Starving; but the Governour
upon Reflection, that the Air and Soil of the Islands
at that time of the Year,When the Winds do not blow. were in every ones
opinion unhealthfull, resolv'd to protect the poor men

in his own Ship, hoping to preserve both himself and
them, saying in their behalf, It would be unhumanly
done to deny them the Sea who fled from the Land;
They had but little Winds, till they met with the
Trade winds on the Coast of Guine, where the Governours
Ship striking upon the ground,The danger his Ship was in. was like to overset,
those Seas, in the judgment of Mariners being clear,
and where the Card mark'd no Sands. Every ones Confusion
was like his who drinks in Death unexpectedly???
the season and fear too heightned the danger, when
the Ship being all on one side,Not feeling the Rudder. and not feeling the
Rudder, began to be on float again; it might be chance,
but seem'd a miracle. The Governour commanded
'em to shoot off three Pieces, that the Ships which were
on stern him might avoid the Sands, which, not understanding
the Warning came upon 'em; but with better
Luck, than Skil, though of the same Burden with
the Admiral, scap'd the Sands, finding in the same place
other Fortune, the cause of which pusled the Seamen.
         38. The Governour,He arrives at Mocambique. with the whole Fleet got together,
pursuing his Voyage arriv'd at Mocambique,
where the Landing of, and the procuring conveniencies
for, the sick men was what he chiefly minded, being
in that assisted by his two Sons, Dom Alvaro, and Dom
Fernando, who then were Heirs apparent of his Charitableness,
afterwards of his Valour; the time he staid
at Mocambique, he observ'd, the Fortress the State hath
there to be ill contriv'd in being too far from the shore,
by which, with difficulty it provided and reliev'd our
Fleets, and being in a bottom was commanded by many
Hills, which also hindring the good Air, made it unwholsome;
He put this to those who either by Study,
or Experience, had any Skil in this Science,Changeth the Fo seating it better. and all
agreed that the faults in the Fortification were judiciously
observ'd; what was Debated was immediately
put in hand, and with the choice of a convenient Situation
he ordered Materials and Work-men for a new

defence; and this going on in the Governours sight,
the Gentry as well as others carry'd Stones, some for
Flattery, others to promote the Building.
         39. The Fortress made tenable, and the Sick recover'd
by the fresh Air and fresh Provisions on shore,He departs for Goa. the
Governour set Sail again, and having the Winds always
favourable, cast Anchor on the 10th. of September
at the Barr of Goa; where, Martin Affonso de Sousa,
(by a Ship which went before) having had notice his
Successour was near, provided to receive him with such
Jollity as might shew the content he had, in welcoming
his Guest, and leaving his Government; he went
presently in a Rich Brigantine to meet him at Sea,
whence he carry'd him to Antoni Correa's House of Pleasure,
whilst the Solemnity of his reception was preparing;
there he Feasted the Governour, Gentlemen,
and Captains of the Fleet, with so much Exquisiteness
in the manner, and aboundance in the meat, that it
seem'd he was doing the last honour to his expiring
charge. That night there were Balls and Dancing,
Rejoycings which the simplicity of old Portugall
carry'd to the East. Here the Governour staid two
days, attended by all the Gentlemen of the place, who
forsook Martin Affonso de Sousa, even those who were
his Favourites, and he had rais'd from nothing, disciplin'd
in the Oriental ingratitude of the Indians, who
cast stones at the setting Sun, and adore him rising.
         40. When the Entry was to be, the two Governours
were in a Faluque with gilded Oars, and an awning of
divers-colour'd Silks; the Castles and Ships entertain'd
'em with the horrour of reiterated shootings, the Vivas
and expectation of the common people did without
any cunning flatter the new Government;His arrival, and reception. they came to
Land at a great place where the Common-Councel in
a body expected them, and when they were plac'd with
all the Ceremony vanity for that purpose hath invented,
one of the Magistrates made an Elaborate speech,
in which the State expected a great deal of happiness

in the new Minister; after the Governour had heard
the publick Flatteries, he listned to the private ones of
a great many, who with them made way for their particular
Interest.
         41. When the Solemnity was ended,What condition he found his Government in and Don Iohn
possest of the Government of India, Martin Affonso
went to Cochim, to provide for his return into the Kingdome;
the Governour immediately was engag'd in the
care of quieting the People, who were all in an Uproar
for the alteration of the Money, which the King's
Officers had rais'd, to the prejudice of the Subjects, and
the scandal of the Neighbouring Pagans; I'le tell the
occasion begun it.
         42. There is current in India a low sort of Money,by the Alteration of the Bazaruccos.
which they call Bazaruccos, which amongst Christians,
Moors, and Pagans, had always the same Valew; this
being of Copper, (which then came from Portugall and
bore no price) the Officers thought fit for the King's
profit to raise the price, the alteration of the Money
was solemnly Proclaim'd, and it began to pass at the
new Rate; but, as this Legal worth was not intrinsical,
(the Valew coming from the Law, not from the
weight) the Pagans (not subject to strangers Laws)
brought not in the usual Provision, and the people
seem'd to suffer by their own orders; the Chief Officers
back'd it as the King's cause, standing for the King's
profit, in the Peoples destruction; the whole City
cry'd out, that the Kings of Portugall never encreast
their Treasuries by their miseries, nor us'd to Drink in
Gold plate their Subjects tears; that the Pagans and
Moors made their Braggs that not being able by the
Sword to ruine the Portuguese, by their own Laws they
Destroy'd 'em, arming against 'em the ambition of their
Governours. The hunger and liberty of the Petitioners
grew high, justify'd by a good cause, and the
Conformity of the common oppression;He hears the City and People. with these
grievances the Magistrates of the City, with the poor,
Women, and Children, (some full of Complaints, the

other of Arguments) went to the Governour, who
Commanding the people to be quiet, heard, as a Judge
the Magistracy, as a Father the rest, and hunger admitting
of no long Cures, ordered the next day for determining
the business; thus he sent them away satisfy'd, some believing
that (as was the custom of India) it being his
predecessors Act, it would by him be counted unjust. The
same evening he sent for the King's Officers,His resolution about it. and after
hearing what they had to say for themselves, referr'd the
matter to the ablest Lawyers, and those best skill'd in
the policy of that State, who unanimously agreed the
decree to be Cruel, and very contrary to the Pious intentions
of our Princes; this opinion too was countenanc'd
by Custom, and the Peoples privileges, besides
other Legalties, which (not to make our History tedious)
we lay aside. This Law being revok'd by the Governour,
Provisions began to come in from the Inland-Country,
and the people made him a present of those
Lives he had by the indulgent remitting the Tax redeem'd.
         43.Hidalcaon's first Embassy. This business made an end of with so much repute
to the King's Clemency, Embassadours came to
him from Hidalcaon, who (after the Customary salutes
and giving him joy of his Office) desir'd the Delivery
of a Prisoner on the terms agreed on with his Predecessor,
and this business coming to that height as to
engage the State in an open Warr, we will not leave its
beginning unrelated.
         44. Bazarb Prince of Balagate Dying,Meale's is the better cause. when Nuno
de Cunha was Governour, Meale, though in his Cradle,
was Heir apparent to the Crown, then was Hidalcaon
the second Person in the Kingdome in Power, and the
first in Courage, having in the late Warr with the
Neighbour Princes given a large testimony of his Actions;
Hidalcaon (as amongst this so Barbarous a people
Men reign oftner by making use of their Opportunities,
than by observing what's Right) seeing his own
strength, and the Heirs incapacity, pave his ambitions

way to the Crown, began to try the hearts of the great
Ones, before whom with a great deal of Artifice he
deplor'd the miseries of the Kingdome, in so Infant a
successour, under whom they must obey or endure, as
so many Kings all those he fancy'd; that the Princes
with whom they had now Warrs would not let slip
this occasion of ruining 'em, when they saw him who
should defend 'em in the Cradle; that where, there were
so many, they ought to find out one to save their
Country; that he would be the first should obey him,
because the Government of the Kingdome could not
wait those slow motions, by which Nature gives a little
one first Strength, then Understanding; that if with
unprofitable obedience they should adore Meale in his
Nurses arms, he did not doubt but by keeping their
King, they would lose their Kingdome. He was affable
to the People, liberal to the Souldiers, as if he desir'd
to Reign not for himself, but for them: Ambitiously
making use of, the whole Chain of Vertues, not as
necessary for Living, but Reigning. The great Ones
at last offered him the Crown, believing, he would always
remember he was his Subjects Creature, and
etain constantly in his Memory so signal a grace.
         45. Hidalcaon was Liberal and Stout, and without
doubt would have been a great Prince, had he kept the
Kingdome by the same Vertues he put on to atchieve
it; but seeing himself obey'd, those affected Artifices
not having any natural motion, were at an end, and
broke out into ambition and pride, the Vices of his
Person; He did not then speak of killing Meale, either
out of a counterfeit Clemency, or an unheard of Cruelty,
intending perhaps that the poor Prince should by
a servile obedience confirm the Scepter he had usurp'd
from him. The Nobility of the Kingdome (repenting
when 'twas too late, and seeing they now could not
without danger, be either Traitors or Loyal) consulted
how Meale might secure himself from the Tyranny of
Hidalcaon, as if the unfortunate Prince had had more

            
            
            
            
right to his Life then his Kingdome; some years past
in these contrivances, in which Meale arriv'd at Age to
apprehend his danger, and considering that his presence
reproach'd the Tyrants guilty Conscience, (who plotted
with his blood to quiet the memory of his usurping
the Crown,) by the Counsel of those who took the
Kingdome from him, He went to Cambaya, where he
was well receiv'd, both King and People shewing, how
much they resented the miseries of the Blood-Royal;
but, as such favours have more ambition in them, then
charity, they lasted not long, for, only the first days they
treated him as a King, the rest as one Persequuted, but
Meale still continu'd in Cambaya, counting more tolerable,
the sleights of a Stranger, then the injuries of a
Tyrant.
         46. In the mean time, Hidalcaon's great design was,
to destroy those who gave him the Crown, whom, for
all they had a just title to his favour by being complices
in his Treason, he hated, because they put him in mind,
either of his Obligation, or faults, and being now jealous
of his own Actions, he found that Cruelty would
root him faster then Clemency, so that his own Vice,
and necessity together made him doubly so; upon pretence
of correcting faults, either imputed, or forgot,
(covering his Tyranny with a veil of Justice) he inchroach'd
upon the Estates of the great Ones, to Level
'em with the common people, Confident, by pulling
down the Nobility, to get into the poorer sort, who
(out of a natural dislike of their own Fortune) do always
delight in the fall of those above them; and they
(seeing their patience work'd not their quiet) consulted
how they might restore Meale, some were for
Revenge, others for Calling him in; they had their
private meetings, where they took divers Resolutions,
which fear, or the difficulty of the business, (harder
to execute then design) every day altered; their forc'd
obedience being at last wrack'd to the utmost stretch
by new oppressions, they endeavour'd by Hidalcaon's

Death to redress their Error, and hide the shame of
their former Treason; the Desperate, not the Bold
were of this opinion, because now Hidalcaon liv'd with
the strength of a King, and the circumspection of a
Tyrant; He was assisted by the people, who hating the
King, lov'd the Cruelties he us'd against the Gentry,
who, for the disproportion of theirs, and the others
Fortunes are always obnoxious. The Plotters fearfull
of themselves, and that their hatred would cool by
delay, their base servitude too, turn Customary, seeing
their own Force not equal for the enterprize, laid out
for assistance from abroad; they bethought themselves
of imparting the business to Martin Affonso de Sousa,
(then Governour of the State of India) desiring him
to send for Meale from Cambaya, and let him be at Goa;
that though he refus'd the glory of restoring him, he
thereby would keep Hidalcaon in awe, and inclinable
to serve the States occasions.
         47. Martin Affonso being perswaded, that 'twas more
convenient to increase then extinguish this Flame
which begun to burst out, 'twixt Hidalcaon and his
Subjects, and that the weakning of a Warlike and
Powerfull neighbour would turn to the States advantage;
(Cloaking these conveniences with more plausible
pretences, as the sheltering under our Arms a dispossest
and persecuted Prince, an Action glorious abroad
and profitable at home) resolv'd to find out Meale at
Cambaya,See Iohn de Barro's Hist. of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 10. Cap. 11. giving him notice of his Subjects inclinations
for his Restauration, who would be more eager when
they saw the State protected both his Cause and Person.
The Moor upon the receit of so unlook'd for a message,
(counting the pity, of men not only different but contrary
in Religion, extraordinary) betook himself to
the faith and favour of the State, and with his poor
Family embarking himself, arriv'd at Goa, where he was
by the Governour receiv'd, with honours more befitting
his Blood then Fortune, by some construed to be
done him, more for effronting the Neighbour then respecting

the Guest. Meale's arrival (who begun now
to Reign in the hearts of a great many) being voic'd
all along that Coast, his party began to be stronger
among the Plotters, who now saw, his cause sheltered
under the protection of our Arms, and his name sounding
better in the peoples Ears.
         48. Hidalcaon upon consideration,Hidalcaon's Embassage. that the State
(whose victorious Arms were the more dreadfull by
their nearness) did not send for Meale only to secure
his Person, but defend his Cause, dispatch'd Embassadours
to Martin Affonso de Sousa, giving him notice that
he understood Meale was in his power, whom, he
thought Fortune preserv'd, to disturb the peace of the
East; that he knew what Title some Seditious spirits
gave him, who being weary of Obeying, strove to set
up new Lords whom they might Command; that
Hidalcaon would not tell what mov'd him to seize on
the Crown, because if Princes were bound to give account
of their Pretensions, there were no difference
'twixt King and People; that the right of Princes was
to be judged of God, not of Men; that 'twas the
Worlds opinion now that there was no difference in
Princes titles, but only in their Persons; that he deny'd
not, that Contemptible and Cowardly Meale was of the
Royal blood, but, that, the fault Nature committed,
Fortune would correct by giving the Kingdome to him
who was Daring and Stout; that nature to Lyons only
gave a Crown by their Birth, Men she let winn it and
wear it; that many things appeard injust to the World,
because besides Custom; that for a man who was worthy
of it, to possess himself of a Kingdome, would at first
be look'd upon as a Scandal, afterwards as a Law; that
Meale was the basest Fellow ever Born in his Kingdome,
and he the most Fortunate, and naturally all men hated
natures Monsters, and lov'd Fortunes prodigies: that
we should examine our selves, how we came to Lord
it in Asia? what Kin we vvere to Sabayo, that he should
leave us Goa? how near vve were Sultan Badour to

Inherit Dio from him? whether Achem left us Malaxa
by his Will? and all the places which pay us Tribute
all over the East? that he desir'd us not to quarrel at
that Title in him, that made us absolute Lords of the
World; that, we should let God alone with the Government
of the World, and being Born farthest West,
not busie our selves to compose the Disorders of Asia;
that he would have us know, he had in his Kingdome
Mines of different Metals, that some furnish'd him
with Gold for his Friends, others with Iron for his Enemies;
that in the last place, he desir'd the Governour
to deliver him up Meale, that, by the mercy he should
use him withall, the World might see how worthy he
was to Reign, who so treated his greatest Enemy; that,
his Embassadours had order to settle all that concern'd
the State.
         49. Martin Affonso having receiv'd the Letters, and
given Audience to Hidalcaon's Embassadours, understood
by 'em, that they proffer'd for Meales person an hundred
and fifty thousand Pardaos, and the main Land of
Bordez and Salsete, very considerable to the State for its
Revenue and Nearness to Goa. Martin Affonso look'd
upon the business, as very weighty, and either Face
promising great advantages; the restoring of a Prince,
and pulling down a Tyrant, was a design worthy the
Arms of Christians, by which the State would purchase
no ordinary reputation, letting the World see, that our
Banners were not displaid in Asia, either to usurp Kingdoms,
or get Riches, since their employment was that
the Pagans and Moors of the East, should keep the true
Faith towards God, and Justice amongst themselves:
On the other side 'twas said, that if Meale after a long
Warr should come to Reign, he could not give the
State more, then now without it Hidalcaon offer'd, and
that the Moors by their hatred and Religion being
Enemies, the World would laugh to see us with our
own Blood, destroy one Infidel and set up an other;
when too our happiness depended on both their ruines,

besides that our Arms came not to India to defend the
Enemies of the Faith, but to destroy 'em; that if Meale
found no Protection from the King of Cambaya, his near
Kinsman, why should he look for't from the Portuguese
to whom he was an Enemy? that when he found himself
restor'd, and strong, the first Lance that was hurl'd
against the State would be his, because the Neighbourhood
of so brave men who made him King would be
suspicious to him, and the Memory of so great a good
turn was enough to make him Hate us.
         50. Martin Affonso, on grounds not throughly
weigh'd, resolv'd at last to deliver up Meale, dispach'd
the Embassadours; and with them Galvaon Viegas an
Honourable Gentleman, with full Power, to settle the
Contract, in the manner it hath been related, sending
with the consent of the Embassadours to take immediate
possession of the main Land, in virtue of Hidalcaon's
profer.
         51. In this condition did Dom Iohn de Castro find
the affairs of Meale, and was sued to by a new Embassy
from Hidalcaon, in confidence of the Capitulation made
with his Predecessor;The Governours answer. but Dom Iohn with different
maturity answered Hidalcaon, that the Portuguese were
faithfull to their Enemies, much more to their Guest;
that the propositions of his Predecessor, were more for
a right understanding of the cause,See Iohn de Barro's History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. then to determine
it; that the main Land belong'd to the State by more
antient Grants, and that it was just out of its Revenue
to maintain Meale, in gratitude to the Kings his Predecessors,
who annex'd it to the State, that he should
suffer him quietly to enjoy this little memory of his
Right; that the States securing his Person, was not
yet Protection but Charity; that he should not with
over-hasty Arms disturb the Peace, for then he would
make sure what he fear'd, provoking the State to take
in hand the revenging of both; and because his Embassadours
had hinted that, the denying Meale would
necessarily make a Breach, He put 'em in mind that

most of the Fortresses we had made in India, were
founded on the ashes of destroy'd Kingdoms; that the
Portuguese were like the Sea, which raiseth it self and
grows greater in Storms; that for his part as he sought
not a Warr, so he could not deny one.
         52. With this answer the Governour dismist the
Embassadours, who, by his firmness in delivering it,
understood that neither fear or advantage would bend
him to give up Meale; Immediately he put himself in
readiness to make or expect a Warr, which coming
from a neighbour Prince we might sooner feel the Blow,
then see the Sword. He gave orders for the raising of
Horse, which were to be about two hundred, and to
serve under the same Colours, a more stout, then orderly
Militia: He entrusted the Guard of the City with
the Train-bands, and had Souldiers in pay ready for
any suddain invasion of the Enemies. He set upon the
making ready the Fleet out of hand, which by the Voyages
and Warrs of his Predecessor, and the poverty of
the State, he found all in pieces, and the strength of the
Navy, being what is most considerable, here he wholly
laid himself out; He new fitted the Vessels which lay
in the River, made three Galleys, and six Round-bottom'd
Ships with wonderfull speed, not failing the
Officers in their pay, or his thanks; by which means the
work went on, diligence over-coming time; He nam'd
Captains of those Galleys and Ships, who intended
the work as their own business, an expedient, which did
a great deal towards the quickness of the dispatch, the
goodness and plenty of Ammunion and Provision,
with which (in an opportune and short time) the
Fleet was ready, with this he so bridled the Neighbour
Princes, as he hindred 'em from joyning with Hidalcaon,
who had already sollicited them to shake off the yoak,
as an advantage to the common Liberty.
         53. Hidalcaon,Hidalcaon's first motion. having notice of the Governours
resolution, appeal'd to the Justice of his Sword, endeavouring
to carry the Warr from home, before Meale's

presence rais'd the people, who by their commands,
and advantages in the Warr, would make the cause
their own: He presently on severe penalties forbid the
Victuallers carrying the ordinary Provision to Goa,
which, having it all from the Inland, was not furnish'd
to endure so suddain a Warr; after this he sent Acedecaon
a stout Turk with ten thousand men, to take in,
that part of the main Land, which Liv'd under our Obedience.
         54. But Dom Iohn de Castro knowing, that first successes
give reputation to a Warr,The Governour goes in Person. went out with two
thousand Foot, and the Horse of the place to resist the
Enemy, and being perswaded by a great many Gentlemen,
that he should not engage his person in so unequal
a party; that it was not for the honour of a
Governour of India to put on his Sword against one of
Hidalcaon's Captains, nor to let the World know he
look'd so much upon this Warr, especially having Gentlemen
who deserv'd the honour and danger of the
Action; it was not possible to disswade him from his
first resolution, saying with more confidence then his
Forces would bear, that he went out to Chastise, not
to Overcome, and marching two Leagues from Goa
he came in sight of the Enemy, who, lodg'd at the foot
of a Hill with a River in their front, (which was to
them instead of a Ditch and Trench) with the advantages
of their numbers, and Encamping, expected ours,
who though wearied with their March, re-inforcing
themselves by the presence of the Governour, or sight
of the Enemy, begun to pass the River with more Resolution,
then Discipline, the Commanders could not
stay, or order them, the most daring cast themselves
into the River, and the more cautious were by this put
upon a necessity; as to most of 'em to follow their
Comrades example, past for Discipline.
         55. The Governour with admirable prudence commanded
those who staid behind to go over the River,
knowing, that what was in the beginning a fault, was

now the Cure; and because that day he had not room
enough to Order as a Commander,He fights and routs the Enemy. he Fought as a private
Souldier. Our men run upon the Moors so furiously,
that discouraged, with the first Onset, they gave
ground, and their Ranks, being confus'd and broken by
themselves, were disordered and overcome; Our men
(which seldome happens) seeing an Army routed
without loss. The Moors loss was great in their Flight,
none at all in their Resistance; Ours were two Leagues
executing the Liberty, and cruelty of Victory, gathering
up the Arms those poor men flung away, as a burden,
not a defence. The pursute lasted as long as the
Day, the horrour of the Night freeing the Enemies
from that of the Victory; Our Souldiers retreated, full
of Blood, Honour, and Booty; the Governour kept the
Field till the next day, without censuring the Souldiers
for that Disorder which gave them the Victory,
following the course of human judgements, which never
speak well of Losses, or blame Victories.
         56. The Governour,He returns to Goa. at his Entry into Goa, was receiv'd
with an extraordinary applause, from that people,
so us'd to see, and slight Victories; and because, in this
and many other Fights which Dom Iohn wonn, he
call'd upon the name of St. Thomas, the Apostle of the
Indies, we believe they were got by the favour of so
great a Padrone, who, to recompence the piety, and
honour the memory of Dom Iohn de Castro, was pleas'd,
in the days of his Government, to discover that miraculous
Cross, found at Meliapor on the Coast of Choromandell;
the wonderfull Cross and the Body of the
Saint being as it were cover'd with the same Earth,His veneration to the Cross. and
as Dom Iohn de Castro worshipp'd this sign of our Redemption,
with a due, but a strange Reverence,
(lighting always from his Palanquim or Horse when he
met the Cross,A kind of Sedan in the Indies, carry'd on mens Shoulders. and putting himself on his Knees) this
discovery will not seem to have been by chance, since
the mercies of Heaven come not by accident. We will
give you the relation of the Mystery, because it carries

with it a successive miracle in testimony of the faith of
the East, cultivated in those Countries with the Blood
and Doctrine of our Portuguese.
         57. After the wonderfull finding the Body of this
holy Apostle in the City,The finding St. Thomas's Cross. or rather ruins of Meliapor,
(then call'd Calamina) the Kings, Dom Manoel, and
Dom Iohn, being with a pious Zeal inflam'd to revive
those dead Ashes, which had been there from the first
planting Christianity by the Apostle, (though now
corrupted by the Doctrine of the Armenian and Chaldean
Priests, who separated from the Roman-Catholick
Church, did make those well-meaning Christians
swallow dangerous Opinions, which by the pains of our
Missionaries have in part been reform'd) set upon
Building a Church in the same place where the Venerable
Body of the Apostle was found, and opening the
Foundations for the Fabrick, found a Cross (wrought in
a Marble Pedestall) of four Spans long and three broad,
besprinkled with dropps of Blood, which might be
thought to be newly done, (the Cross was like that of
the Knights of Aviz;) on the bottom of the Pedestall
were lesser Crosses of the same fashion with the biggest,
sprinkled with the same spots of Blood; on the top of
the great Cross was a hovering Pidgeon, there was Old
writing about it, which, (being in an unknown
Tongue, and not in one continued sence) the Natives
understood not; the oldest and most knowing Antiquaries
in different Languages were consulted with,
but none could make out the Character or meaning of
the Writing, till a while after was brought a Bramene
from Narzinga, who expounded it in current Sence, and
said thus;
         Thirty years after the Law of the Christians came into
the World, on the 21th. of December, the Apostle Saint
Thomas Dy'd in Meliapor, where was the knowledge of
God, change of Laws, and the destruction of the Devil;
This God taught twelve Apostles, one of whom, with a staff
in his hand, came to Meliapor where he Built a Temple, and

the Kings of Malabar, Choromandell, and Pandi, with
others of different Nations and Sects freely submitted themselves
to Saint Thomas's Law; time was when the Saint
was put to Death by a Bramene, and with his Blood made
this Cross.
         This Exposition, being an hir'd Interpreters, in a
matter of so great moment, our Nation did not too
confidenly believe, but sent for an other Pagan Learn'd
in all the Oriental Languages, who, knowing nothing
of the other Exposition, decypher'd the Letters in the
same manner, without any difference, the Copy of the
Print (as you see it here) was brought to the King
Dom Sebastian in the Year 1562.
         
            
            
            
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
Our Nation (with the greater expence in reverence
to that place, which had been the Depository of so
Sacred a pledge) went on in Building the Church, the
Piety and Conflux of the people of Malabar was great
too, at the sight of so notable a Testimony of their
Faith. The Church was in a short time perfected, the
Cross engrav'd on Marble (as we have said) serv'd
in place of Altar-piece. Divine Service began to be
said there, with the Decency so remote a place would
permit; and on the 18. of December, (the day of our
A peculiar Feast in Spain and Portugall, when the B. Virgin look't to b brought to Bed. Ladies expectation) as Mass was saying in a full Congregation,
when the Priest began the Gospel, the Holy
Cross too began to be cover'd with a great Sweat,A famous Miracle of the same Cross. letting
fall no little drops on the Altar. That the signs of
the Miracle might be more Visible, the Priest stop't
in the Sacrifice, wip't off the Humidity the Cross
breath'd with the Corporalls, which (before a great
many there present immediately seem'd dip't in Blood);
the Holy Cross began presently to change its Alablaster
to a paler Colour, which turn'd to an obscure black,
that too chang'd to an unusual bright Azure, which
lasted as long as Mass, when that was done it came to
the natural Colour of which 'twas found.
         58. The same Miracle hath successively for many
years been seen on the same day, and we know by good
Authors and faithfull Relations that it yet happens
sometimes, by which means, those Christians with a
stronger Faith receive our Doctrine. This Miracle, after
much arguing on both sides, was clear'd before the Bishop
of Cochim in open Court, the proceedings came to
this Kingdome, in the time of the King Dom Henry, the
Cardinal, who, by the consent of Pope Gregory 13th.
confirm'd the Miracle, which is now divulg'd in our own
Chronicles and forein Authors. Dom Iohn de Castro receiv'dHow the Governour was affected with the News.
the news of this Miracle with no ordinary shew
of Piety, protecting Saint Thomas's Christians, opprest
with the slavery of Pagan Princes, who had taken from
'em certain Grants and Priviledges, which by the intercession

of the Holy Apostle had by the Kings their Predecessors
been indulg'd 'em, but, by the hatred of
the Infidels, and corruption of the times were only remembred.
         59. Hidalcaon gave not over infesting us on the main
Land with his usual incursions, which kept us on continual
Duty, and hindered the Husbandmen from Tilling,
upon which the Governour resolv'd to strike
where the Blow might be most felt;He sends his Son Dom Alvaro against Hidalcaon. He presently
Commanded his Son Dom Alvaro to go out with the
Fleet, he had provided, with Orders, to do all the hurt
he could in Hidalcaon's Ports, giving the Souldiers all
free Pillage, that the hopes of Plunder might make 'em
not mention some Arrerages the State ow'd 'em; and
put by others from playing the Merchants, a Corruption
which stole upon a great many by the foul example of
their Superiours.
         60. Dom Alvaro put to Sea with 900. Portuguese
and 400.He goes out with six Ships. Indians on six Ships and some long Boats with
Oars, and after a few days Sailing spy'd four of Hidalcaon's
Ships going with Stuffs and other Commodities
to Cambaya. Dom Alvaro presently commanded his
Captains to come on Head him, and the Boats to keep
close to the shore, for fear the Enemy should out of
Desperatness run a ground; the Ships were Merchant
men, and but few Souldiers in 'em, who, seeing they
could neither fly,His prize. nor defend themselves, sent aboard
the Admiral two Moor Merchants, who, with reasons and
tears, shew'd themselves not concern'd in the difference
'twixt Hidalcaon and the State, and profer'd a reasonable
present toward the expence of the Fleet; but
neither the covetousness of the Souldiers, or the policy
of Warr would let them be heard, but the Ships were
Boarded and sent to Goa, that the Prize might be divided
according to the Governours Proclamation. Upon
the arrival of those Ships at Goa, the people was
stangely transported, seeing Victories so got one upon
the neck of an other; in the first they prais'd the Courage

of the Father, in the second the Fortune of the
Son.
         61. Dom Alvaro,Dom Alvaro proposeth the Entry into Cambre. seeing opportunity and weather
on his side, and that the Souldiers were contented because
they had in hand the fruit of their late Enterprize,
commanded his Pilot to steer to the Port of Cambre,
where, since the breaking out of the Warr, Hidalcaon
kept double Garrison; there were two Forts with
Ordinance planted at the entrance of the Barr, and the
Chanel was so narrow that without eminent danger
our Ships could neither pass through, or ride there.
The General Dom Alvaro, put to the Captains of the
Fleet the apparent difficulties, which every one concluded
of moment enough to be considered of, alleging
that voluntary undertakings ought not to be set upon
with so certain danger; that they should more to purpose
carry on the Warr against Hidalcaon, by Lording it
in his Seas, and in his sight, taking away his commerce;
that there was more hazard then profit in what could
be done by Land; that (as they saw) the Chanel was
so begirt with those Forts, our Ships must pass by the
mouth of the Canon; that the first Ship they should
shatter, would hinder the rest from passing. But Dom
Alvaro urging,He resolves to invest. that he was resolv'd to execute his Orders,
which were, to get on shore and burn the Enemies
Ports; the Councel replied by proposing, that he as General
should stay to Command at Sea, and that most of
the Commanders of the Ships would strive to pass the
Barr, because if any thing should happen amiss to the
Admiral of that Fleet, Son and Heir to the Governour of
India, what greater Dammage could the State receive,
then the necessity of engaging in so just a Vengeance?
On which Dom Alvaro in a great deal of passion brake
off the consult, saying, that he car'd for no Victories
where his danger was not as great as the least common
Souldiers; that, out of obedience he was their General,
and in danger their Companion; that, he had instructions
from the Governour, to venture his own

Person on every occasion, his Souldiers but upon necessity;
that he look'd upon the Dangers they represented
to be less then those he came in chase of, because
Honour was not to be purchas'd without hazarding;
that he came from Portugall to find out this Day, which
he hop't would be glorious for them all, and that in
this Resolution he ask't not their advice, only that they
would consult about the manner of the falling on. The
Generals Gallantry, and Youth, did then excuse his
Rashness, afterwards the Success; 'twas agreed that the
men should go into the long Boats, and that at the beginning
of the Dawning when Day-light was not well
broke, and so the Enemy not sure of his aim, they
should get on shore;He gets on shore. they all that Night provided themselves,
seeing in the Generals looks hopes of Victory.
The General (having left sufficient Guard on the Ships)
got on shore, with 800. Choise men, and with Fortune
so declaring for him, that of a great many Shot that
lighted on the Boats, not one either kill'd or wounded
a Souldier, this accident being a Disposition to, or beginning
of the Victory.
         62. The City (which ran along a great Plain) contain'd
five thousand Families, the Houses by themselves,
and not leaning on one an other, without any other
policy,The largeness and strength of the place. union, or share of ground, then what every one
took for his pleasure or ability; and yet the Turrets
and Balconies of every House, did altogether present a
rude Stateliness, as if Built with more Pride then Art;
it had on the North-side a little Mountain, whence ran
some small Rivulets, with no name, which, contributed
both to the pleasantness and fertility of the Soil.
The City was antiently Inhabited by the Bramenes, now
by Merchant Moors, a place amongst the Eastern people
always famous, then for Superstition, now for Wealth;
it was not defended by either Walls or Works, the Inhabitants
being secure by the Power of their Lords, or
the Peace they preserv'd with the Neighbouring Princes;
but at present, the Warr we had with Hidalcaon beginning

Victoriously, the Moors, saw the danger they were
in, by example, and had drawn two thousand paid
Souldiers to Guard the City, who with the standing
Militia, were (according to their computation) sufficient
for their Defence.
         63. These came, with their Colours flying, and with
so much resolution to hinder our men from Landing,
as for a good while they retarded us, obliging us to
Fight at a stand,The Enemies resistance. and so close as our Souldiers could not
make use of their Musquets, whose first charge only,
they receiv'd with notorious resolution. Here Dom
Alvaro notably shew'd his Valour and Conduct, encouraging
his men to Fight, sometimes by Speeches, sometimes
by the Example of his own Actions. Ours at last
saw themselves so streightned as they fought more for
Life then Victory. The success, for an hour hung doubtfull,
till a great many of the Inhabitants, wounded
with their own fear, and our Swords, quitted the Field,
shewing in the first encounter, Valour, above Men, in
the second, below Women, a thing very ordinary in
raw Souldiers, where the greatest fear follows the
greatest daring; the rest by this example were getting
off, in fear and disorder; here the Moors receiv'd great
loss, falling with little or no Resistance, those who
drop't too were so many as they hindred the rest from
Flying.
         64. Ours entred the City mingled with the Moors,Ours enter,
where the poor men stop't, o'recome with the fondness
and tears of Wives, and Children, who then with
useless compassion bore 'em company, rather Witnesses,
then Defenders of their Lives; some there were, who
embracing their Husbands let themselves be run through
with our Lances, inventing fresh sadness by a new
remedy; Of our Souldiers, some Robb'd 'em, some
Defended 'em, some following the disposition of the
Season, others of their Nature; Out of desperate Love
some of those Women ran amongst our arm'd Squadrons
to seek their Dead, seeming not to valew their

Lives; full of tenderness for others Wounds, without
any for their own;and gain the City. at last we gain'd the City with less
loss, then danger, because resolving to enter under the
Enemies Canon, Dom Alvaro was more lead on by
Courage, then Discipline; the greater part of the
Moors was Destroy'd, some in the Fight, most in the
Flight; the VVomen shew'd more Courage, then their
Husbands; These lost their Lives, they could not
defend, the others despis'd theirs they might have
sav'd; of ours there Dy'd twenty two, the VVounded
were more, of whose number was the General hurt by
an Arrow. 'Twas necessary to end one Cruelty to begin
an other, their Anger ceast, and their Covetousness
began; Dom Alvaro gave order to Plunder the City,
where the Booty was as great as the Victory,The Destroying and Plundring of it. because,
either out of Confidence or Carelesness the Moors had
sav'd nothing, and kept in the City those who were
useless for the Defence of it, out of contempt of our
Forces, or not to dishearten their own. In fine, the
Prize was so great, that it could not all be carry'd
aboard, the Souldiers took the best, leaving the rest as
Fuel for that Fire which was to Consume the City,
by Dom Alvaro given up to the merciless Flames;
which did not a little strike the Neighbouring Colonies,
that place being the Richest and most Tenable of all
the Coast, once, as it were, the Bulwark of the rest,
now their Lamentable example.
         65. The General with all the Fleet weigh'd Anchor,
and steer'd for Goa to unlade the Ships,Dom Alvaro returns to Goa. (put out of
their trim, by too great a Burden;) resolving to leave
there the Sick and VVounded, and return to carry on
the VVarr, which the Souldiers, content with the Liberality,
and Fortune of their new General, very much
desir'd. The news arriv'd at Goa before the Ships, the
Governour very much valued the Victory, the people
the Plunder; not long after came intelligence, that
those who had scap'd the Rout had been to acquaint
Hidalcaon with the lamentable Destruction of their

City, who, while they vented their first grief for their
Children and Kindred, could not keep in the second
calamity of their Goods and Houses, where the devouring
Fire had so mingled the Ashes, they could not with
peculiar tears, weep over their Dead; they told Hidalcaon,
that if he resolv'd to continue the Warr with such
a people, they would go and Inhabit the Deserts, where
they should be out of sight of those Western Beasts,
Born for the reproach and ruine of Asia, they told and
curs'd our Victories one after the other, which look't
bigger in their Fears, then our Books.
         66. Hidalcaon, considering the fortune of our Arms,
the complaints,Hidalcaon profers Peace. and calamities of the Inhabitants, and
many disaffected to his Service, whom the Warr, and
those Successes would more embolden, was inclinable
to Peace, thereby to remedy the Dissentions and Seditions
at home, which might grow stronger by the liberty
of men in Arms; and communicating to his
Councel the present condition of things, all were of
opinion, they ought by a feignd peace to cloak their
grievances, expecting till time offered 'em a fairer opportunity
to set upon the State, joyning their Forces
with other Kings who were offended. And the Moors
fighting more for their conveniency then quarrel, Hidalcaon
sent Embassadours to the Governour, frivolously
excusing the Warr he made, and minding him of
the benefit the State might receive by his Friendship.
         67. The Governour, in publick and in great State,
gave audience to the Embassadours,The Governour accepts it. answering them,
that as he sought not for Warr, so he could not deny
it; that the felicity of the State consisted in having
many Enemies, because with Spoils and Victories it grew
always greater; but, that he never deny'd Peace to any
one, who by his Actions, and faithfull Friendship deserv'd
it; that he would deprive his Souldiers of the
conveniences they look't for from that Warr; but
Hidalcaon must know the first day he was to pass for a

King, was that in which he treated Peace with the
Portuguese. Thus did he dispatch the Embassadours, aw'd
with so great a Courage; with the same neglect did he
always manage the Warrs in the East, in which his Valour
was equal to his Fortune.
         68. He presently betook himself to the dispatching
particular business,He looks to the affairs of the State, rewarding the Souldiers who had
serv'd him, whom he parted with as well satisfy'd with
the rewards he gave them, as his acceptance of their Service;
He put Commanders into the void Forts, which
were unprovided by the King; making so just an estimate
of Deserts, that he was Debtor neither to conveniency,
or the State, a virtue hardly arriv'd at by Princes,
and very rare in their Ministers.
         69. He was not less fir'd with zeal for the honour of
God, then for that of the State, in the confusion of
Warr, and the noise of Arms, applying himself to matters
of Religion,and matters of Religion. as if he had been only sent to stickle
for them. And the King Dom Iohn, knowing his Piety,
as well as his Valour, commended to him the propagation
of the Faith, and Divine worship. Out of a Letter,
which on this Subject the King writ him, is well gathered,
how both King and Minister were inflam'd in God's
cause, of which we will here give a Copy, that the World
may see our Arms in the East, brought more Sons to
the Church then Vassals to the State.
         
            The King's Letter to Dom John
de Castro.
            FRiend and Governour. The great Concernment, which lies
upon Christian Princes to look to matters of Faith, and
employ their Forces for its Preservation, makes me advise
you how sensible I am, that not only, in many parts of India
under our Subjection, but even in our City of Goa, Idols
are Worshipp't, places in which our Faith might more reasonably

be expected to Flourish; and being as well inform'd
with how much liberty they celebrate Heathenish festivals,
we command you, to discover by diligent Officers all the Idols,
and to demolish and break 'em in pieces where ere they
are found; Proclaiming severe punishments against any one
who shall dare, to Work, Cast, make in Sculpture, Engrave,
Paint, or bring to light, any Figure of an Idol, in
Metall, Brass, Wood, Plaister, or any other matter, or bring
them from other places; and against those, who publickly,
or privately, Celebrate any of their sports, keep by them any
Heathenish Frankincense, or assist and hide the Bramenes,
the sworn Enemies of Christian Profession; whosoever of
the fore-nam'd shall run into the like Crimes, 'tis our pleasure
you Punish 'em, with that severity the Law in that case, or
our Prolamation requires, without admitting any appeal or
dispensation in the least. And that the Pagans may submit
themselves to the yoak of the Gospel, not only out of Conviction
of the purity of its Faith, and fed with the hopes of
Eternal Life, but be advantag'd too, by some temporal favour
shew'd 'em, (which doth very much work upon Subjects
hearts) you are with all Diligence to see that the new
Christians, may henceforward have and enjoy all the Exemptions
and Liberties from Taxes, enjoying those Privileges,
and places of Honour, which the Pagans did hitherto use to
do. We have too been inform'd, that many Indians are forc't
to go in our Fleet, and are for that at charges against their
wills, desiring that so great Exorbitancy should be remedy'd,
we order that the Christians be exempt from that Oppression,
and in case the necessity be very pressing, you shall if they go,
(with that trust we look for, from your care, and diligence)
provide, that they be every day satisfy'd for their Labour;
Having known too, from grave and credible Persons, (and
what we particularly resented) that some Portuguese buy
Slaves for little, that selling them to the Moors and other Infidel
Merchants, they may get by 'em, which is done to the great
Dammage of their Souls, they being easily to be Converted
to the Faith, we command you to employ all your power for
the preventing so great an evil, by hindring such Sales, for the

great service which by it is done to God, and you will do to us,
if with the rigor the case requires, you remedy a thing which
appears so foul to us. You are to take care for the curbing the
excessive liberty of some Usurers, who as we are inform'd, are
amongst you under the protection of an old Law of Goa,
which we do at this present, and you are also to revoke, taking
it away from the Body of the rest, as contrary to Christian
Religion; you are to give order for the speedy Building a
Church in Bacaim, which is to be Dedicated to St. Joseph,
and upon our account to assign it rent for a Rector, some
Beneficiaries, and Chaplains who may officiate there; and
because the Preachers, and Ministers of our Faith, by going
about to Convert the Pagans, are in Necessity, we think it
fitting, and 'tis our will to give 'em something towards defraying
their Charges, and only for that you are to lay a yearly
Tax of three thousand Pardaos on all the Mosques the
Moors have in our Territories. You shall too out of our
Customs and Rights for ever give three hundred Bushels of
Rice for the maintenance of those whom the Vicar Miguel
Vaz either hath or shall Convert about Chaul, which quantity
we order to be put into the Bishops hands, that he (as
he sees necessity) may distribute it. We have too been inform'd
that about Cochim, Saint Thomas's Christians are
cheated in their weights and measures by our Merchants
who sell Pepper there, and that they take from 'em the Surplusage
they (according to an old Custom) ought to have over
and above the just weight, and measure, whom for many respects,
'twere better to favour then oppress; for that end
you are to give order, they may enjoy their old Customs; you
are also to treat with the King of Cochim, that he cause to
be tane away certain Pagan Rites and Superstitions which
his South-sayers use to practice in the sale of Pepper, his
advantage by 'em being very little, and the Scandal to the
Christians who contract there very great; and because we
have been advis'd of the Cruelty that King useth against
those Indians who receive our Faith, by seising on their
Estates, you must zealously endeavour the said Kings (to
whom we have writ about it) leaving that so Barbarous

cruelty, which so much injures the Souls and Bodies of his
Subjects, which, being our Friend, he will do; you on your
part employing that care we charge you with. For that,
which by your Letters and Advises we have, concerning the
delivering the people of Socotora from the miserable Slavery
in which they Live, we are of opinion so to remedy it,
that the Turk (whose Subjects they are) shall not with his
Fleets infest those Seas, you are to look how that is most
conveniently to be done by the advice of the Vicar Miguel
Vaz, whose Experience, both in that and all other business
of moment that shall occurr, will very much help you. We
know that those who Fish for Pearl, besides other wrongs
and oppressions they lye under, suffer in their Estates, our
Sea-Captains out of their little fear to God, forcing 'em on
very hard terms, only to Fish for them, upon which, (desiring
that none of our Subjects should suffer any Violence or
Oppression) we order you to see that those people be not so
hardly us'd, and that our Captains usurp not so unjust a
Power; and further, for the avoiding the like grievances
and cruelties you are to look if those Coasts be sufficiently
Guarded, and, if 'tis possible for us to recover our Dues
without having a Fleet there: and finding it Feasible, you are
to withdraw thence our Captains, commanding none to Sail
along those Coasts, by that means the Natives may enjoy their
Estates, and Cruelties and Extorsions be prevented; above
all we recommend to you the consulting with the Father
Francisco Xaverius in what ever occurs, chiefly what is to
be done for the encrease of Christianity on the Fishing Coast,
that those who are newly Converted may not be employed in
the Fishing, if they be, it may be upon knowledge that with
their new Religion they have got new Manners, and the great
abuses they use in it may be Curb'd. We have been likewise
inform'd, that those who from Paganism are Converted to
our holy Faith, are ill us'd and despis'd by their Kindred and
Friends, who, with so great Outrage and so high an Hand
banish 'em their Houses, and seize on their Estates, that they
are forc'd to Live miserably in great want and necessity;
that such things may be redress'd, you are (with the Counsel

of the Vicar Miguel Vaz) to see they be reliev'd at our
Charge, putting, what is to be given 'em, in the hands of the
Rector who hath care of 'em, that he may every year distribute
it as is most convenient. We know too that from Ceilaon,
there came a youth to Goa, flying the fury and anger of his
Kindred, and being (as he is) of the Royal Family, that
he ought to succeed in the Kingdome, upon which, (for the
encouragement of those already, and those yet to be Converted)
we have thought good that you accommodate him (now hes a
Christian) in Saint Pauls Colledge in the City, where, at our
Charge, such Lodgings, and necessaries may be provided him,
as are sit, not only for his maintenance, but pleasure, that our
Grandeur with Persons of his quality may be seen; besides,
you are to endeavour to clear his claim to the Kingdome; and
what you find in the business, send us with the proofs, that
we may according to conveniency provide; in the mean time
'tis our pleasure, that with all imaginable severity you call
the Tyrant to account for his Cruelties against those who are
Converted to our holy Faith; obliging him to give satisfaction
for so great insolence, that all the Princes of India
may see our love to Iustice, and how we put upon our own
score the protecting those who cannot help themselves. And
because, 'tis not fit Pagan Artificers should (as hitherto hath
been allowd 'em) Cast, Paint, or Work any Images or Figures
of our Lord Christ, or his Saints, to sell 'em; we
command you to use all diligence, for the hindring it, laying
Penalties, that he, who shall be prov'd to make any of the
fore-mention'd Images, shall (besides the having two hundred
Drubbs) lose his Estate, because without doubt it looks
not well that Images representing so holy Mysteries should
pass through the hands of Pagan Idolaters. We have it
from the same hand, that the Churches newly begun to be
Built at Cochim, and Coulaon, want finishing, being uncover'd
and expos'd to all the injuries of the Weather; which
is not only an ill sight, but prejudices the Building; you
shall therefore give Order, that (without sticking at the
charge) they may be gone on with, till Finish'd, by the work
and design of the best Architects and Overseers; you are

too, to cause a Church to be Built in Naraon, in Honour of,
and with the Dedication to, the Apostle Saint Thomas, and
to look to the finishing of that already begun in Calapor,
by the name of the holy Cross; you are too, to make another
in the Neighbouring Island of Coraon, for design and stateliness
as you shall think convenient, there being nothing,
which, in the Pagans will more stirr up Devotion for the
matters of our holy Faith, then the affection they see on our
part. Besides which, we do more straightly charge you with
the founding Schools and Houses of Devotion, in all places
fit for't; whether, on certain Days, not only the Christians,
but Pagans may resort to Sermons, and Spiritual exercises,
that so they may come to the Love of our holy Faith, and the
Knowledge of the errors in which they Live, being illuminate
with the Light of the Gospel; for which you are to
choose Ministers with those parts such a Ministry requires.
And above all, earnestly desiring that the Name of God may
be known and worship't, and his holy Faith receiv'd in our
State, we will, and 'tis our pleasure, that in the Territories
of Salsete and Bardez all the Idols, and infernal Worship,
which hath hitherto been practis'd there, be utterly rooted out;
and that it may be done with the less difficulty, and without
the necessity of using any force or violence, we command
the Preachers in their Sermons and Disputations, to manage
the hearts of the Pagans with such prudence and zeal, that
(by God's blessing) they may be sensible of the good intended
them, by bringing 'em to the knowledge of their Errors,
and delivering 'em from the miserable servitude of the
Devil in which they are, out of which, they only are to be
freed by closing with our holy Faith, the sole way to know
that blindness in which Satan leads 'em, not to consider how
much the Salvation of their Souls concerns 'em; and because
it very much imports this business, that the undertakers
of it be Men of a good Life and Conversation, and
able Scholars, you are to pick out such, from whom we may
expect the Effect we desire, and to recommend to 'em the care
and diligence requisite on their part; and on yours, you are
to endeavour the drawing of, and favouring all men, especially

the Nobility and Great ones, (whose example the multitude
follows) and who being once reconcil'd to our holy
Faith, the difficulty will be but little to Convert the common
people, who will immediately be doing, what they see done
by the Grandes. Let them who turn, he well us'd, (that
more may be wonn) having favour shew'd 'em, not only in
the general, but in their particulars, be they never so poor
and miserable. Of all this, we thought fit to inform you,
that, for the confidence we have of your care and diligence,
you might remedy all, from which, great Glory will result to
our Lord God; and we will reckon it to you as a peculiar
service.
            
               Dated at Almeirim the eight of March in the year
of our Lord Iesus Christ 1546.
               
               By the KING.
            
         
         70. Dom Iohn put as much of this Letter in Execution,
as his being always in Arms would permit him;
for the time of his Government was one continued
Battail, and the Souldiers, by the Licence of VVarr,
were readier to ruine the Laws, then reform their Manners;
yet will the History shew us no slight Arguments
of his Zeal, recompens't extraordinarily by Heaven
with signs and miracles, one of 'em, which hapned in
the Molucca's, (annex'd to his Government,) I'le relate
with my Customary brevity.
         71. The light of the Gospel had shin'd in those Islands;
(Saint Francisco Xaverio as a faithfull Labourer
in the Lord's Vineyard, having in a great part clear'd
those places of the Thistles and Briars of Infidelity)
though we owe the first Cultivating to that great
Portuguese Antonio Galvaon, the most Couragious Governour
and Zealous Apostle of those Pagans, whose
Prowess was answered by its Fruits in the wonderfull
Conversion of Souls, who with their Baptism receiv'd
the easie Yoak of Christ, the Princes and great
Ones, as well as the People, being all Tunable to the

Obedience of the Gospel. The Devil perceiving that,
in that Cessation of Paganism,A miraculous success in the Mocuccas. a Light appear'd from
Heaven discovering the ways of Life, arm'd against the
innocent Christians a Pagan thereabouts call'd Tolon,
who had usurp't the Island of Moro. He with infernal
Zeal began to persecute the new Converts,
forcing them by new Torments to turn Renegados from
that Faith they had profest; for which, many chose to
shed their Blood in a happy Martyrdome, others of
weaker Faith yielded to the Torments. The Tyrants
boldness encreasing to the Affronting of our Arms,
oblig'd 'em out of obedience to the Faith, and for the
service of the State, to Chastise that Idolater. The
persecuted, and fearfull, came with complaints to the
Portuguese, in Ternate, who resolving to bring down
the Infidel, with more zeal then strength went to find
him out at his own Home. Their motion could not be
so secret, but the Tyrant had notice of it; who, by
fortifying the entrance of the Island with Trenches and
strong Barricados, provided for his Defence; and in
case our men should get those, he had strew'd Splinters
and long poyson'd Crows-feet in all the Avenues
which led to the City, o're which, whilst ours in the
heat of Anger, and Victory, past, they must necessarily
lose themselves. It hapned, that after winning the first
Stacade, (which the Infidels probably quitted without
any hot dispute, in confidence of their second Stratagem)
whilst ours, baited with the flight of the Enemy,
were incautelously passing on, there fell on a suddain,
(a thing miraculous) such a quantity of Ashes from the
Sky as made ours stop, till, after the Air was clear'd,
they pursu'd their Victory over the Crows-feet, where
the Ashes had made the way hard and sure; so the
astonish't Infidels afterwards related it, making use of
the Miracle, for an argument of the truth of that Doctrine
they persecuted.
         72. Thus did Asia yield to the Faith and the State
in the time of Dom Iohn de Castro, who had in one hand

the Gospel, in the other a Sword, and fill'd the East with
the discourse of so great an Action, as was, the Voluntary
undergoing a Warr for the defence of Meale, a
persecuted Moor, whose Subjects had refus'd him their
Obedience, and the Princes his Allies their Protection.
         73. Asia gave him but little time of rest in the Triumphs
of his Victories, Cambaya beginning immediately
to rouse him with the Alarums of a new Warr; the
noise of it was already in the States intelligence; but
being the most notable piece of our History, we will
relate it in a Book apart.
      
      
         
         THE LIFE OF
DOM IOHN DE CASTRO.
         The Second Book.
         THE Portuguese were more fear'd, then
lov'd by the Princes of Asia, on the
Death of Sultan Badur King of Cambaya,
whose private Faults and publick
Punishments got him (by the
Prerogative of the Blood-Royal) the
peoples affection, either out of the natural Commiseration
to Sufferers, or reverence of Majesty, and hatred
of our Government, not less abhorr'd as Forein, then
Powerfull.
         2. Mahumud King of Cambaya, Heir to the Crown
and wrongs of Badur, (who Dy'd in the Government
of the great Nunho de Cunha) equally fir'd with glory,The King of Cambaya consuls how he may take Dio.
and revenge, did (as our Chronicles relate) design
to take Dio from the Portuguese; and (by the Confederacy
of other Princes) to drive 'em out of India,
an undertaking, (as some of his own were of opinion)
not very difficult; their Arguments were, that the
State was a monstrous Body, whose Head being in the
West, fed the Members so infinitely distant from it, by
the interposition of so much Sea, and Land; that
Cambaya's strength was so great, that as well by its
Ruine, as Victories, it could crush the State, already

weakned with so many accidents. The great Ones,
and Nobility of the Kingdome, were divided in their
Opinions; some, arguing from the first Siege, (their
VVounds at it, and Memory of it, being yet fresh)
thought the Portugueses Arms fatal to Cambaya, and
though they took to heart the Death of Badur, yet by
others patience in taking Affronts, did they excuse their
own; they tax'd those, who were the first Authors of
making peace with the State, and those who now would
have it broken; the last, because they kept not their
Faith; the first, because they were not sensible enough
of injuries. Others, (as when things are uncertain, it
frequently falls out) discours'd to the contrary; and
found as many arguments for Warr, as Victory.
         3. Amongst all the rest,Is perswaded by Coge-Sofar. the most Powerfull
and Obnoxious man of Cambaya, and who had got
the best share in the King's favour, with a great deal
of Caution spurr'd on the Warr, believing, the Heart-burnings
which were against his Fortune, and the Envy
of the great Ones, would, being the fruits of Peace,
cease in the common danger; and by his Command and
Power in the Warr, he should preferr others, who being
his own Creatures would be true to him; I'l give a short
relation of the man, because his name will often occurr
in his History.
         4. Coge-Sofar was by Nation an Albanese, and the
Child of Catholick Parents,What Coge-Sofar was. though the Fruit degenerated
from the Stock. He had serv'd some time in the
Warrs of Italy, more taken notice of for a brave, then
a Souldier; in all Mutinies and Tumults, pick't out as
the worst; for some years he led this loose Life, without,
either reward, or punishment; untill, like a restless
man, who had rather seek then expect his Fortune,
he chang'd his Profession; of a Souldier becoming a
Merchant, for being Cunning and Covertous, this was
the nearest and surest way to what he aim'd. He begun
in a little time, (knowing the opportunity and seasons
of Commerce) to grow great by his business, being at

once Liberal, and Covetous, for his own ends cunningly
making use of both Vice and Vertue. His Stock and
Credit was at last so considerable, as Trading up and
down the Streights, with three small Vessels of his own,
of different Lading, he was met with by Rox Solyman,
Admiral for the Soldan of Cairo, who Boarded him,
made him yield, and took what he had. The Prize was
greater then the Victory, and Solyman for the credit of
his own reputation, treated him Honourably, presenting
him to the Soldan as a Prisoner of Quality, valuing
more his Person then his Booty. Coge-Sofar began to
be as content with his misfortune, as if it had been of
his own seeking; He was experienc't Souldier enough
by his Service in the Armies in Italy and Flanders; He
spoke of the Forces of the Christians with malice and
undervaluing, as if intending to teach the Soldan to
know his own strength. The Soldan was by these Artiices
brought to look on the Slave as capable of great
things, and begun first out of curiosity to listen to
him; afterwards out of affection. Coge-Sofar with so
sly a flattery commended what ere he did, well, or ill,
as it past but for freedome, because making a shew to
be only zealous, not acceptable, he kept to himself, the
Soldan's favour, and avoided all publick honours more
out of cautiousness then modesty. He came to be
Treasurer of Cairo, a place of very great trust, which
he manag'd with prudence, and fidelity, Vertues so
pris'd by the Soldan, as if not till then known amongst
the Infidels. At the Councels of Warr his Vote weigh'd
most, sometimes for his experience, sometimes for the
reason of it; in all designs against the Christians, particularly
in those which were to be carry'd on by others,
He declar'd his sence with a great deal of confidence,
and by this means grew so great that he could not bear
his own Fortune, till, not minding the preserving himself
by the same Arts he was advanc't, his Ambition and
Pride burst forth; He possest what places he could, and
more sollicitously look't after Preferments then Friends,

whose help or company he now Valew'd not, he desir'd
to be known, only for the Soldan's Slave, and for Master
of the rest. He plotted the Destruction of the great
Ones on publick pretensions, as if he aim'd that two
only were to Govern, till the Moors, wearied of so base
a patience, began publickly to complain and disturb
the Soldan's inclinations to favour Coge-Sofar, they
very feelingly acquainted him with their grievances,
saying, they might now be very well excus'd from setting
out Galleys against the Christians, if their Slaves
were to be made their Master, when Turks of the best
quality were by the Christians so cruelly us'd, as to go
up and down Italy and Spain dragging their Chains
after 'em, and had their Faces stigmatis'd with infamous
Letters, in token of their Captivity, that 'twas not
to be born for so many great Bashaws to receive Laws
from a despicable Slave; that, though every day they
with their eyes saw their own Outrages, they could not
disgest those which were offered to their Prophet, by
a vile, irreverent and haughty Christian, not so much
as going into their Mosques; that now nothing more
was to be done then the setting up Crosses in the streets
of Cairo, and commanding 'em to be ador'd.
         5. These things were said with so much freedome,
as they look't more like conspiracy then complaint, and
with particular grievances involving the cause of Religion,
(which ordinarily carries with it, its own Justification,
and the affections of the People) were willingly
listned to by the Soldan, who put Coge Sofar out
of his Office, with command to change his Religion;
so frail do even the greatest Favourites find their Princes
favour.
         6. Coge-Sofar seeing himself falln, put on again his
first Humility, and those Artifices the necessity of the
times taught him, and having now only the name and
memory of a Christian, easily chang'd, for the Poyson
of the Alcoran, Evangelical Salvation, quitting the name
given him in Baptism for that of Coge-Sofar, by which

we before hand call'd him, not knowing the first he had???
Coge-Sofar being a Mahomitan, began to winn upon the
Moors in their confidence in him; healing by gifts the
hatred of those who envy'd him; by his new Apostacy,
(by which he Cancel'd the suspition of his fidelity)
the malice of the people; carrying on his designs with a
more sly ambition, which made him more affable to his
Enemies then to Strangers; but knowing the Soldan's
Fickleness,How he come to Cambaya. fearing too a second complaint, not reckoning
on reconcil'd favour as secure, He treacherously one
night Kill'd his mortal enemy Rox Solyman and his
Son, and putting together all the Jewels and Money
he could, went away secretly for the Service of the King
of Cambaya, of whose Grandeur and Liberality he had
had full information, and how he valew'd Strangers,
those especially who had any experience in the Warrs
and Policy of Europe; the success answered his forecast,
for in a little time, either by his Fortune or Indudustry,
he came almost to engross Badur's favour, being
his Companion in his Victories and Losses, being in the
last which befell him at his Death. So that now grown
by the King's bounty, to be in Power and Authority
the greatest Subject, holding also with Mahumed Heir
of the Crown the same repute, for the reasons we have
already related, and to deserve the favour of the new
Prince, by the love and fidelity he shew'd to the Ashes
of him who was Dead, he urg'd him to revenge Badur's
Death; 'tis reported, that he spoke to this purpose before
the King and Nobility of Cambaya.
         7. The favours which for ten years I receiv'd of
Sultan Badur (for which those abroad admired his
Grandeur, those at home envy'd my Fortune) are
known to every one. He cast his Eyes upon me, and
like a Vapour rais'd me from the ground, preferring
me, a Stranger, and a Vagabond, before those who
were born in his Palace; of a Subject he treated me
like a Friend, and lov'd me as a Son. From this most
Gracious Prince, (whose Ashes I reverence as my Lords,

and weep o're as my Fathers) have the Portuguese
under the sacred shew of peace ta'ne away his Life,
to the great Scandal of all other Kings, and no less
Outrage of his Subjects, unworthy to have been so,
to so mighty a Prince, since we so insensibly and ungratefully
behave our selves; Feeding at our own
home the Murderers of our Monarck, who enjoy, as
Inheritance, a place, which by so hainous an offence
they made their own, lately Strangers, now Patrons.
You! Oh Prince, Heir and Lord of this Empire, see
your Subjects every day receive Laws from these Insulters,
'tis for you to decide, whom we are first to
Obey, our King, or our Enemies; their boldness will
grow greater by our patience, after committing the
foulest fault, what will they count little? where no
Vengeance is ta'ne on injuries, who will stick to be
the Offendor? Lets at last awake out of this so mortal
a Lethargy. Lets put our Arms up to the Elbows
in the Blood of these so unhuman Usurpers. Lets
bathe our Semitars in this Poison, that with their
Lives they may lose the glory of their so great boastings.
The Portugall Arms by the Blood of Badur,
receiv'd the greatest repute, by the foulest crime, and
we suffer that Sword in their hands still, which cut off
our King, that with the same, they may usurp his
Kingdme; Lets cast from amongst us those Vipers
bred furthest West for the infecting all Asia, as will
be evident by running over their Outrages, by them
calld Victories. And to begin with the first of
them,
                  The Portuguese, having, with infinite danger, difficulty and expence employ'd 75 years in discovering the Western Coast of Africa, Bartholomew Diaz in the year 1486. and in the Reign of King Iohn the second, discovered the Cape of Good Hope, (so call'd by the King after the return of the Fleet, from the hopes he had after that to discover the Indies so long design'd; but by Diaz at first nam'd Capo Tormentoso, from the Storms and foul Weather he met with there) K. Emanuel (who succeeded King Iohn) in the year 1497. sent Vasco de Gama with a Fleet to the Indies, who past the Cape, and Sailing by the Island of Mocambique, the Kingdome of Quiloa, Mombaca, and Melinde, doubling the Cape Guardafu, (at the mouth of the Red-Sea, and Cape Rasalgate, at the Persian Gulf) arriv'd at Calecut the chief City of Malabar, Camoens, Cant. 1. St. 12. of his Lusiade, says of him,

                        Dovos tambem aquelle illustre Gama
                        Que para sy de Eneas toma ?? fama.
                        The illustrious Gama in the rear I name,
                        Who robb'd the wandring Trojan of his Fame.
                     
                  
                  So rendred by the Right Honourable Sir Richard Fanshaw, (Embassadour to Portugall) in his excellent Translation of that Poem.
                Gama, (to whom, for the disturbing the

peace of the East, the Seas gave so fatal a passage)
the Samorim of Calecut was the first his Sword cut off;
the Fleet of Meca, which under the protection of our
Prophet, and the peace they enjoy'd by Sea, Sail'd
securely, was by this successfull Rover set upon, and
made to yield, who for so many years like a Sea-Monster
had for his House the Waters, and for his shelter
the Winds, and Tempests. After him came
                  Dom Francisco de Almeyda went (with a great Fleet, and the first Title of Vice-Roy,) to the Indies in the year 1505. April 6. His Son Dom Lourenco D' Almeyda obtain'd against the Samorim of Calecut in ight of Cananor an eminent Victory on the 26, of March 1506. The King of Calecut's Armado consisted of 208 Sail, 84 great Ships, and 124 others Vessels (by 'em call'd Paraos) on which were vast numbers of Moors and Naires; The Portuguese had but eleven Sail, and on 'em 800 men, with whom they Destroyed the whole Fleet, wich was well furnisht with Artillery. See the relation of this Fight, History of India, Dec. 1. Lib. 19. Cap. 4.
                  The Samorim to revenge this loss, sent to the Soldan of Egypt, and the King of Cambaya to assist him against the Portuguese, and joyn'd with their Fleets, set upon Dom Lourenco's in the River of Chaul, who (after his Ships striking and springing a Leak) was Kill'd by a Canon shot, History of India, Dec. 2. Cap. 8. Campens Can. 10. St. 29, 30.
                Dom
Francisco de Almeyda, who, in one day, and with the
same stroke shatter'd the Fleets of Egypt and Cambaya,
who so behav'd himself, as if in
                  
                     Eys vem ?? pay com Animo estupendo
                     Trazendo furia, & magoa per antolhos
                     Com que ?? paterno amor lhe est a movendo
                     Fogo no coracaon, aqua nos olhos
                     A nobre ira lhe vinha promettendo
                     Que o sanque fara?? dar pelos giolhos
                     Nas inimigas naos: Sentiloha ?? Nilo
                     Podelo ha ?? Indo ver, & ?? Gange ouvilo.
                  
                  Camo. Can. 10. St. 33.
                  
                     Behold! the Father comes a Mad man like,
                     In whom for Mastry, grief with fury strives,
                     Whilst at one time paternal Love doth strike
                     Fire on his heart, pumps water from his Eyes.
                     A noble anger whispers him, his Pike
                     Shall blood his Foes so that the Tide shall rise
                     In their drown'd Decks Knee-deep; Nilus shall bear,
                     Indus shall see his blows, and Ganges hear.
                  
                  Sir Richard Fanshaw's Translation.
                Vengeance of his
Son's Death, he would have drunk up the Blood of
the whole East, ifDom Affonso D' Albuquerque went from Lisbone for the Indies, was Commander of a Squadron design'd for the Coast of Arabia. See his taking Malaca, History of India, Dec. 2. Lib. 5. Cap. 9. His reducing Ormus, see History of India, Dec. 2. Lib. 10. Cap. 3. How he got Goa, see History of India, Dec. 2. Lib. 5. Cap. 3. Albuquerque who succeeded

him in his Cruelty,See Camoens Can. 10. Sta. 40, 41, 42, 43. and Government, had not tane
the Sword out of his Hands; this Man was Born to
affront all our Monarchies, for by Conquering Malaca
he Curb'd all the South-Seas; he reduc't Ormus the
Mart of all the Riches of the World;See Iohn de Barro's Dec. 2. Lib. 6. Cap. 5. took Goa from
the Sabayo to make that the seat of his usurpt Empire,
and without the Armies of Xerxes or Darius,
made Tributary more Kingdoms then he had Souldiers;
He was puft up with the thoughts of taking
the Body of our Prophet from Meca, debated the
changing the course of Nilus to drown Egypt, undertaking
out of his ambition the doing two such
notorious Outrages, one against Heaven, the other
against Nature. I will not go about to relate the
ambition of so many, as by our wrongs have grown
famous, because I fear neither my time or memory
will allow it, do but look with your sight or judgment
on the remotest parts of the East, and you'l see
so inconsiderable a Power giving Laws to the greatest
part of the World; they Sail'd from that part of
Africa which runs along from the Cape of Good Hope
to the Streights mouth of the Red-Sea, possessing on
that shore Mocambique, Sofala, Quiloa, and Mombaca,
and passing the Cape of Guardafu, looking into the
mouth of the Red-Sea, go in sight of Adem, Xael,
Herit, Caxem. The Cities of Dofar and Norbete on
the Cape of Fartaque, first dreaded their Fleets, afterwards,
Curia, Muria, Rozalgate; here lies the City of
Ormus, not farr off the Island of Quexiome, Curiate,
Calayate, Mascate, Orfacaon, and Lima; then they
come to the Capes of Mocandoon, and Iasque, which
form the mouth of the Persian Gulph, which reacheth
to the River Indus; next pass by the Cape of Guzarate,
and Cinde, in our Cambaya, whence as farr as
Cape Comori their Fleets sail all along India, for the
space of three hundred Leagues, beginning from our
City of Cambaya, they rove by Madigaon, Gandar,
Baroche, Surrat, Reyner, Moscarin, Damaon, Taraper,

Bacaim, Chaul, Bandor, Cifardaon, Galanci, Dabul, Cortapor,
Corepataon, Tamega, Banda, Chapora; they first
got Goa the residence of their Governours, now they
have the Coast of Canara, with Onor, Baticala, Bracalor,
Bracano, and Mangalor; then got they that
Chief part of Malabar, which their Fleets allarm,
where is the Kingdome of Cananor, and in that Catecoulaon,
Marabia, Tramapataon, Maim, Parepataon;
with no less insulting they keep in awe the Empire of
Calecut, with its Havens of Pandarane, Coulate, Chare,
Capocate, Parangale, Tanor, Panane, Balcancor, and
Chatua. In the Kingdom of Cananor, and Cochim, they
Domineer without Controul, in Porca, Coulaon, Calecoulaon,
Dotora, Birinjaon, Travancor. The dread of
their Arms reacheth as farr as the famous Cape Comori,
before which lies the renown'd Island of Ceilaon,
where they lade their Ships with sundry sorts of
Druggs. The Bay of Bengala, or Mouth of the
Ganges, doth not scape them, where they are in sight
of Tacancuri, Manapar, Vaipar, Calegrande, Chercapale,
Tutucuri, Calecarem, Beadala, Canhamorra; they o're
run Negapataon, Nahor, Triminipataon, Tragumbar, Coloraon,
Calapate, Sadrapataon; They scare with the
quantity and bigness of their Vessels Biznaga, and
the stormy Coast of Orixa, and all that distance
which lies from Segopora, to Oristaon, and the mouth
of Ganges; they Sail by the Cape of Negraes, Arracaon,
and Pegu, with those so many and so famous Islands;
they go along by Vagatu, Martavaon, Tagala,
and Favay, Tanacari, Lungur, Tairaon, Queda, Solungor,
going as farr as their Malaca, which commands all that
Archipelago, after that, doubling the Cape of Sincapura,
they come to an Anchor in the Ports of the
Kingdoms of Syaon, Camboya, Champa, and Cochinchina,
and going as farr as the Kingdoms of China,
venture to look upon that so reserv'd Empire, which
never admitted of a Trade with Strangers; there
they Built the famous City of Macao, whence they instill

the Mysteries of their Faith into the Chinese,
making their Trade a step to their Religion; from
hence they Rove amongst the numberless Islands of
Iapaon, visiting Tava, Timor, Borneo, Banda, Maluco,
and Lequios, so as the Portuguese Ships with a restless
Sailing Coast the greatest part of the World for
the space of more then nine thousand Leagues, to so
difficult a Voyage animated by their Ambition, and
guided by their Fortune. I have tediously run o're
all the Coast of Asia, where by the influence of
Power or Trade the Portuguese Arms have made themselves
known, because the World doth, from such
scattered Conquests, falsly conclude their Power, and
I their Weakness; for Portugall, being a small Kingdome
furthest West, and in continual Warr with their
Neighbour Africa, where they consume themselves
both by what they Winn or Lose, their Fights, and
Garrisons being always an expence of men, not being
able to stay where they were Born, in hatred of the
Soil and Clime which gave them a beeing, they go
Roving up and down the World, as if Men, Land
and Winds were theirs; I now leave it to the judgement
of the most ordinary understanding, how little
so divided a strength is to be fear'd, which in their
Prosperity will be spent by their Victories; what
cause have we to dread the Government of these Mad
men, who with one Arm in Asia, and the other in the
West, strive to grasp the World? they have in India
many Princes under 'em, but not one Friend, they all
adore and hate their Rulers, because the Portuguese
made peace with none but after Victories, and Outrages,
so as not their affections, but their wrongs
unite 'em, and they all do Homage while they cannot
offend. But what will it be when they shall see
Soltan Mahamud take the Field with an Army? what
doubt is there but that all the Injur'd will be our
Souldiers? by force of Arms they have made many
Kings Tributary, and supposing they now are Protected

by them, a good turn is sooner forgot then an
injury. The Grand Signor Selim, sees the Wounds
his Ianizaries receiv'd at Dio, yet gaping, and one so
little us'd to receive affronts will not let slip the opportunity
of revenging the first, by beginning the
Warr, or seconding you in it, who is ambitious also
of having the greatest part of the World under his
Empire. The Samorim hath not one Port, which since
the Portuguese came into the East, hath not been the
Theatre of their Victories, and scarce hath he one
Subject who hath not been wounded by their Swords.
Hidalcaon sees every day his Territories of Bardez and
Salsete running with Blood, and when the Governour
made an unjust Warr against him, he brought Meale
to Goa to countenance, by his pretended justice to an
another, the ruining him; all the other Princes will
take Arms against the common Enemy, that they
may enjoy the antient Liberty they liv'd in. For my
part I offer my Children, my Estate, and my Person
towards this VVarr; if I fall in it, Badur by my Blood
shall see my Loyalty, and be the success good or
bad, I shall not count Death less Honourable, then
Victory.
         
         8. Coge-Sofar's Arguments were, for the Odiousness
of the cause,The Soldan approves them, and commits the design to him. and the Authority of his Person, well approv'd
of; The King, after magnifying his Loyalty,
commits to him (as to one who out-went all the rest
in his Zeal, and Conduct) the design: He immediately
quickens the preparations by diverse messages to the
Neighbouring Kings, putting them in mind of the Affronts
had been put upon 'em, and offering them his
Princes arms in favour of their grievances. He dispach't
Embassadours to Constantinople, inviting the Turk to
redeem the credit of his Arms by beating the Portuguese
out of India, a thing which as much concern'd their
Religion, as Policy; He made way for the Succour he
ask't of him, with a present of so great Value, as 'twas
more likely to stirr up the Turks ambition against his

Riches, then that he should send him Auxiliary Forces
to maintain 'em.
         9. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas was then Commander in
chief in Dio,Dom Ioh Mascarenhas Comman in Dio. great by his Birth in Portugall, by his Virtue,
in the East, a man who deserv'd as well from his
Fame, as Fortune??? He, by private intelligence knowing
Coge-Sofar's designs, ad that all his preparations
threatned that Fortress, writ what advise he had to Dom
Iohn de Castro, and that he wanted Men, Ammunition,
and other necessaries; neglects which so many years
Peace wink't at;He adviseth the Governour, or, 'twas perhaps, that our men
thought themselves secure, by the reputation of the
former Victory; he added too, that the Soldans Levies
were very forward, and the Enemy near, and that Winter
would shortly come, which would shut out all
Relief.
         10. When Dom Iohn de Castro receiv'd this advise,
he had already sent two hundred Souldiers to the Fortress,
under the Commands of Dom Iohn,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 6. and Dom
Pedro de Almeyda, Sons to Dom Lopo de Almeyda; the
other Commanders were Gil Coutinho, and Luis de Sousa
Son to the High Chancellor of the Kingdome. And
that he might know the condition of the Enemy, He
dspatch't two Envoys,Who writes to the Soldan. (experienc't in the Coast and
In-land of Cambaya) with Letters to Soldan Mahamud,
in which he told him the advice he had, of the Levies,
and preparations he had made, of which, he hop't, for
an account from him, because like a Friend he would
accompany him in his design, which he could at present
very easily do, having ready at Sea a very strong Fleet,
and in the Fortress of Dio stout Souldiers with an Overplus
of Provision, who had much rather enrich themselves
with the spoils of VVarr, then be at the pittance
of an idle Peace; He charg'd too those he sent cunningly
to observe the Enemies Forces, what Auxiliaries
he had, and what the people said, that so by that, they
might Dive into the bottom of the design. But whilst
our Envoys are setting Sail, we will forbear speaking

about the business of Cambaya, to make room for the
successes in the Molucco's, which depend on this Government.
         11. The Molucco's were many years under the obedience
of our Laws, Discovered and Conquer'd by the
Arms of this Crown, which were the first of Europe
came to those Islands, assign'd to us by the partition the
Pope made 'twixt the Kings of Portugall and Castile;
the King Dom Manoel, had on his side the right of Arms
and Laws;The Kings of Portugall's right over the Molucco's. these Islands not coming to Portugall by
Conquest only, but by Inheritance. In the time of the
King Dom Manoel, the last and first of the Name, the
Church and State equally flourish't in those Islands, the
light of the Gospel, in the ecclipse of Paganism, shining
there through his Zeal; many Kingdoms receiv'd
from this so happy Prince their Religion and Government.
This King Dom Manoel,History of India, Dec. 5. Cap. 10. Lib. 10. (Baptizd in Goa) was
amongst others King and Lord of the chief Islands of
the Molucco's, who well grounded in the Mysteries of
our Faith, returning to Govern and Instruct his people,
Dy'd without any Heir, in Molucco; and out of Gratitude,
for the benefits receiv'd of this Crown, left, by Solemn
will, (Confirm'd by all the Formalities of the Law)
the King Dom Iohn the third, Heir of the Kingdoms
of the Molucco's, to be successively annex't to the
Crown of Portugall. These Islands first discovered with
Pains, defended with our Blood, and possest with so
much Right, have we seen parted with (against the
opinion of the best Lawyers and Geographers) to Castile.
         12. The Governour Dom Iohn de Castro found in Goa
Cachil de Aeyro,The Governour gives 'em to Cachil Aeyro. one of great Power in the Molucco's;
who had for his Service deserv'd well of the State, and
was the nearest Ally'd to the Royal blood of the last
Prince Dom Manoel, but, by many accidents so poor,
as he came to India to recommend himself to our Charity.
The Governour, thinking his misfortunes not
deserv'd by his Blood, (believing too that the memory

of our Kings would be more honour'd by giving away,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
then receiving a Kingdome) invested him in the Crown
of the Molucco's, with this caution, that in him, and
his Posterity, the exercise of the Regality should depend
on Portugall. Amongst the Kings of India, some, made
so great a gift a piece of Prodigality, others of Pride,
but all stood amaz'd that we should take so much pains
for what we gave away so easily.
         13. Whilst this was doing, things in the Molucco's,
were not a little disturb'd,The Castilians come thither. by the arrival of three Castilian
Ships, which, falling from their intended course, got
sight of those Islands, and, (to refresh themselves after
a Storm at Sea, and carry their Prince more certainty of
their discovery) Landed in the Island Tidore; I will
not relate the Resistance our men made 'em, because
that hapned under an other Government, and is Written
by a better Pen; I'le but just tell what fell out in
Dom Iohn de Castro's time, who sent Fernaon de Sousa
de Tavora to the Molucco's to dislodge the Castilians,
who, invited by the Plenty and Richness of the Soil,
had a mind to enjoy the Fruits of other mens Labours,
and disturb the Peace, and Trade of those Islands, to
which, by Conquest and Inheritance, we had a double
Title.Who was their Commander. Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, a man more wary then
Valiant was Commander of the Castilians, he had
proudly boasted of the strength of the Emperour Charls
the Fifth his Master, and, of the advantage, which
from his Friendship those Pagan Kings might receive in
their Warrs and Trade, had too handled the report of
us with a great deal of Disparagement; and, (things
hop't for, being in the opinion of men, greater then
those at present) some of the Islands listned to the
Castilian, pleading for it, either sleight or forgotten
Grievances.
         14. Fernaon de Sousa,Fernaon de Sousa arrives at Molucco. sent by the Governour, arriv'd
about this time at Molucco, who upon information, how
things stood, by Iurdaon de Freitas, (Commander in
chief of the Fortress) perceiv'd the Castilians party grew

greater, in hopes of Succour and Money promis'd from
Spain; As soon as Ruy Lopez had notice of Fernaon
de Sousa's coming, and of the business he came
about (desiring artificially to excuse or delay breaking
with us, till the assistance he hop't for, came from
Spain) he sent to Visit him,The Castilian goes about to amuse him. and by a plausible Letter,
minded him, that they were amongst Pagans, who, that
they might be their own Masters, Coveted our falling
out; that we already had Warrs, and Enemies enough
in India; that we were very few to plant so great a
World; that he profer'd us his Sword, with that to keep
the Pagans more in awe; that, as Spaniards they were
good Souldiers, and as Catholicks they were better
Friends; that he was to consider, Peace with the Emperour
more concern'd Portugall then the Cloves of the
Malucco; that those differences betwixt the Subjects,
might prove like Mines, which often play a great way
off the place they were Sprung at.
         15. To this Letter, compos'd of Rodomontados and
Flatteries,Fernaon de Sousa's answer. Fernaon de Sousa's answer was, that he was
but a little man, but as short in his Resolution as his
Stature; that those Islands were his Masters the King of
Portugall; that he was able with the same Sword which
got 'em to defend 'em; that he very well knew him to
be a Spaniard, and a Catholick, but that being so, did
not warrant him to take away his Cloak; that the
Emperour would not make Warr with Portugall before
first reading in the Chronicles of Castile, how it far'd
with his Predecessors; that what he was to do, was, either
to embarque for India, or put himself with his men
into the Fort, thence he would provide him with safe
Shipping for Spain.
         16. The Castilian,The Castilian continues his first motion. by this so peremptory Letter, saw
that Fernaon de Sousa would not by slow-working Physick
Cure the distemper, and, neither able to resist
him, nor willing to obey him, writ to him the second
time, for a suspension of Arms, that they might advise
their Princes how things stood, and they make an accommodement

of this affair; for, if before employing that
diligence there should be any Blood shed, it would lye
upon both the Kings to revenge their Subjects injuries;
that there were betwixt Portugall and Castile many pretences
and grievances which Peace cover'd; that he
was not desirous to revive that Fire which was Buried
in the Ashes of a long Amnesty; that if the Castilians
went away with complaints in their Mouths, their own
injuries might easily bring them back again; that,
though broken with the Sea, and their Sufferings, if
oblig'd to unreasonable conditions, their own Gallantry
would inspirit 'em, with more vigor then their present
necessity.
         17. Fernaon de Sousa, by the intrigues of this Letter,
and other intelligence, knowing, that the Castilians aimd
at doing their business by delays; answer'd, that leaving
off Arguments he should prepare to defend his right by
the Sword.
         18. Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, by this answer finding
himself,The Captains see one the other. either detected or scorn'd, chose rather to be
overcome by reason, then force, and immediately writ
to Fernaon de Sousa that the next day, only with three
Companions they might meet at Sea, to conclude on
the terms of Passage and Shipping he had proffer'd,
which was accordingly done, Fernaon de Sousa coming
from the Fort in a Boat very richly adorn'd, and steering
to the Castilians, who staid for him, they spent a
great deal of time in the tedious Ceremonies of concluding
who was to go into the others Boat; the
Castilian went into Fernaon de Sousa's, where their Salutes
and Civilities made way for the business in hand.
         19. Fernaon de Sousa with a great deal of moderation
insisted on the reasons of his pretensions,Their agreement. which were
engrost and allow'd of, by the Kings of Portugall and
Castile,See the Copy of this agreement, History of India, Dec. 4. Cap. 1. Lib. 7. and which Ruy Lopez de Villalobos was glad to
see, our right being his discharge; they concluded, that
within three days the Castilians should come into our
Fortress of Ternate, where passage should be provided

'em for India, with liberty to carry away the Goods,
Commodities, and Arms they had, and that the King of
idore, of their Faction, should continue as before in our
favour; the Solemnities which ended this agreement
were a great Banquet, and merrily Drinking their Kings
healths, a civility they often afforded 'em; Fernaon
de Sousa (as the custom is in India) added presents
to the entertainment, giving Jewels to the Captain
and his Companions, so leaving 'em more satisfy'd with
their Merchandize, then dispatch, for the pleasantness
of the Cloves made up the Disgusts of their reception.
         20 Fernaon de Sousa,The Castilian keeps ot his promise, having sent away the Captains,
return'd to the Fort, very well satisfy'd that he had so
much, to the advantage of his own Honour, and the
State, plaind so perplext a business; on the third day,
(the day appointed for the Castilians to come to our
Fort) Fernaon de Sousa made all the Pompous preparations
he could, to shew the Pleasure with which he
expected his Guests, whom he went out to Sea to seek,
which when Ruy Lopez was advis'd of, he sent off a
Boat from shore, desiring him to put off the business till
the next day, for he was then encountring with some
difficulties, which from him he should be acquainted
with.What Fernaon de Sousa doth in the business. Fernaon de Sousa, taking this delay to be design,
and that the Castilian kept not touch with him, and
receiving the message at Sea, commanded his men to
Row, and with more passion then prudence went alone
amongst the Castilians; Ruy de Lopez saw it, and with
a Guard of fourscore Musquetiers came to wait for him
at the Sea-side, whence carrying him to his Lodgings,
told him what a Tumult had hapned amongst his men,
for Dom Alonso Henriquez, Captain of a Ship, cloaking
his own interest with the zeal of serving his Prince,
refus'd to stand to the agreement, and had about him
(who upheld his party) his Friends and some mutinous
Persons, possessing the King of Tidore and others
with extravagant Jealousies thereby to encrease his

Faction, calling his Sedition, Zeal, and the Generals
moderation, Cowardise, for delivering up the Arms
and Banners of Spain, which with his Life he had sworn
to Defend, and depriving the Emperour of the Command
of such plentifull Islands, and the poor Souldiers
of the fruit and reward of so dangerous a Voyage; that
the Portuguese, a proud Nation, and always Cross to
theirs, would Laugh at our so tame a surrender: But
that he knew all that bravery to be falsly grounded, for
'twas neither the service of Cesar, nor the love of Honour,
which mov'd 'em, but the desire of the Cloves,
of which they had gather'd great quantities, and could
not trust us, that we would let 'em carry to Spain the
news of that Commodity, whose worth would pay 'em
for all the dangers and troubles they had run through;
Fernaon de Sousa and the rest, (who said as he did)
hearing this, as to that particular, took off their fears,
and (the Castilians gallantry only covering their interest)
the next day they rendred themselves at the Fort,
forgetting the high words in which they had Ranted.
         21. But the noise of Cambaya's Arms allows not a
Digression for less concernments,Coge-Sofar's proposition to the Captain of Dio. Coge-Sofar did absolutely
superintend this Warr, the good Event of which
he laid partly in his Forces, partly in his Stratagems.
Whilst he brought together his Baggage and supplies,
(which for their greatness required several opportunities)
he writ to Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, that he was
desirous to take away that Scandal which disquieted the
Peace made betwixt the Soltan and the State, that
with mutual Friendship they might enjoy the Fruits of
so just an agreement;History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. that we had, by the Articles, agreed
a Wall should be made 'twixt the Fortress and
the City, which was then not done, not to shew
any Jealousie in so young a friendship, but now, when
so many years Peace had carry'd away any unjust affection,
'twas fit to satisfie the people who desir'd that
separation, as a mark of the Liberty they liv'd in; that
when on that side we sleighted the Wall of the City,

'twas out of Anger, and the liberty of Victory, and the
Inhabitants could not endure to be every day minded
of their Ignominy by so scornfull a Memorial; that
when no Symptoms of hatred were in their minds, 'twas
not well to preserve them in scattered stones; that we
being but strangers in Dio, 'twas not for us to give Laws
like Masters; that the Citizens would take it very ill
that what their Kings allow'd 'em, their Neighbours
should take away; that we ought from others Subjects
to seek for Friendship, not Obedience; that the Sultan
had given him that City, which he resolv'd to enlarge
with new Inhabitants, who should see that Fortress was
not a Bridle, but a Defence to those who Liv'd there;
that 'twas but fit the Portuguese should give the people
all possible satisfaction to secure a Peace founded on
oppression.
         22. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas by this Letter perceiv'd
that Coge-Sofar sought for pretences to break, for, to
permit the Building of the Wall, help't his design; to
deny it, justify'd the Warr; whereupon he answered
him,The Captains answer, that in so well grounded a Peace as was 'twixt
Mahumud and the State, 'twould be more secure to
throw down, then go about to build up Walls; that
the Wall would neither endanger us nor secure them;
that 'twixt the Fortress and the City there was an other
manner of defence which Guarded it, which was the
Loyalty of the Portuguese; that he gave him joy of
his new Seigniory, that he might reckon on the Portuguese
as of his other Subjects; that what he propos'd
was to be referr'd to the Governour of India,
who was setting out a Fleet to come and Visit the
Fortress; that upon his arrival he would acquaint him
with his proposition; and immediately advis'd the
Governour how things stood,and advice to the Governour, who by the Envoys he
sent to Cambaya had already a more perfect knowledge
of the intended Siege, receiving but a dubious answer
from the Soldan, who neither own'd, nor deny'd the
Action, unseasonably repeating past offences, as if

(without disturbing the Peace) he would commence
a Warr.
         23. The Governour,Who succ Dio with Men and Ammunition. giving himself wholly up to
this business, and considering the importance of the
place, resolv'd for its defence to engage all the strength
of the State, without sparing expence, danger, or diligence.
He very feelingly recommended the succour of
Dio to the Cities of Bacaim and Chaul, which were the
nearest to him, putting them in mind of their Honour,
Reward, and Duty; in Goa he ordered the providing a
great Carvel with Ammunition and Provision, and two
hundred and fifty Souldiers, who finding the Seas high,
with a great deal of difficulty recovered Bacaim, and
striving to cross over to Dio, were by strong and contrary
Winds shattered and forc't back.
         24. Coge-Sofar not having his Forces together,The Tchery Coge-Sofar set upon. set
upon us by other ways. With large gifts, and greater
promises, he bought out the fidelity of one of our
Souldiers, that in the dead of the Night he should
either fire the Powder, or poyson the Cistern, or if he
could not compass either of those designs, he should
endeavour, through the House in which he Liv'd (fit
for that mischief by its joyning to the VVall) to let
the Moors into the Fort.History of India, Cap. 6. Lib. 1. Dec. 6. The Souldier being timorous,
or irresolv'd, acquainted an intimate of his (a Moor)
with the business, who (the reward for discovering
Treasons being surer then for Executing 'em) told
it to the Commander in chief, he having, by two other
hands had it, and considering how foul the fault was
for the example of it, and not sufficiently prov'd for the
punishing it, that the Offence deserv'd not pardon, nor
the Conjuncture allow'd not the punishment, sent
away the Souldier with Letters to the Governour, acquainting
him with what proofs he had of the suspected
Treason.
         25. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas making sure of a Warr,What preventions Dom Iohn Mascarenhas made.
gave order (whilst a pretended Peace gave Colour to a
Trade) to buy up what Provisions were in the City,

            
            
               DIO
               map of the island of Dio
            
            
            
a care which for some time kept off, or reliev'd their
Starving; for the security of commerce was soon altered,
by a Captains coming into the City with five
hundred Turks, more to dispose, then make a Warr.
He brought fresh Letters for the Commander from
Coge-Sofar, in which both warily and earnestly, he prest
the making up of the Wall; Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
would not now return any answer to 'em, telling the
Turk, the Portuguese granted no Petitions, which were
writ by men with Musquets on their Shoulders. That
day was not the first of Warr, being the last of Peace;
for on the next Coge-Sofar entred with eight thousand
men to begin the Siege, cutting off from us all succour
by Land; what was to be expected by Sea, the storms
of Winter began now to hinder; the worst Enemy
the Fortress had.Illustre em  & batalhas. Fam'd for Sieges and Pitch't fields, Cam. Can 10. Sta. 35. This being the place where the Portuguese
acted so great wonders, we will in short inform
you of its situation.
         26. The Island of Dio, renown'd for the Richness of its
commerce,The descrption of Dio. deplorable for the ruine of its Inhabitants,
famous for the report of our Victories, lies in a Bay, and
on a Point, which bounds the Kingdome of Cambaya,
in the heighth of twenty two degrees Northward. The
Natives do fabulously speak of the antiquity of its
Foundation, allowing it a more noble, then certain beginning;
keeping the Records in their Traditions for
want of writing: The Port was always the chief Scale
of the Bay, frequented by Ships which went to Mecca,
which Voyage, Religion and Trade make very gratefull
to the Moors. The City, is by a Channel which
goes about it, divided from the main Land; 'tis by
situation strong, and by helping out nature with art,
is made more tenable. The Channel which surrounds
it, hath two Outlets, one toward the North, which
shallow, and full of Sands is of no use; the other toward
the South inconvenient too for the Cragginess of
the Rocks which form it; it hath on the fore-part of
the Isle an other Channel where Ships may Anchor, and

by this is the best passage to the City. 'Tis not of that
figure,The famous Portuguese Historian who hath writ their Voyages to, and Conquests, in the Indies; often quoted in this Translation. Iohn de Barros describes it of, having been altered
by the differency of Moors who have possest it,
each of them Fortifying it a new way, as they were
taught by their judgment or the variety of Times.
         27. Coge-Sofar came into the Town with eight thousand
men, (many of 'em Turks who serv'd him for
Pay) sixty great Pieces, ('mongst which were eighteen
Basilisks) Ammunition and Provision for his men, as
fore-seeing the length of the Siege;Great Canon so call'd. He had too in his
Camp a thousand Ianizaries, who had more then ordinary
Pay; who, out of their Habituated insolence
slighted the design, condemning Coge's fear for bringing
Forces together, and disturbing the Grand Signior's
Arms against four pitifull Christians, defended by a rotten
Wall, against whom, neither Honour was to be
gain'd by Fighting, or Plunder by Conquering. Coge-Sofar
neither commended, or condemn'd the Turks
courage; but (better taught by his fear, or experience)
look't upon the Victory as not so sure; in
opening his Trenches, planting his Batteries, forming
his Squadrons, he shew'd himself a Souldier; and when
he was laid down before the Fortress made this short
Speech to the Turks.
         28. Friends,Coge-Sofar Speech to his men. and Companions, 'tis not my design
to teach you, either to fear or despise those few Portuguese,
whom you see besieg'd within those Walls;
for though Souldiers, yet are they not more then men.
Fortune hath hitherto, bore 'em company, or serv'd
'em all over the East; and the Fame of their first
Victories hath help't 'em to the rest. VVith a few
men they make VVarr upon the whole VVorld; and
by the course of things, an Empire (kept up only in
the Opinion, or by the weakness of the Conquer'd)
cannot last, without Forces; they have scarce five
hundred men in the Fortress, most of whom are Garrison
Souldiers, who of custom use to be the poorest,
or most useless; by Land they can have no relief,

what is to be had by Sea, the Winter cuts off; they
want, by the security of their Peace, or Pride, (out
of which they despis'd every thing) Ammunition and
Provisions: being but few, the same men must always
be upon that VVall, not having one Souldier in reserve,
to supply an others place; they have not
Pioneers to repair the Breaches of our Batteries, and
their Duty amongst so few must necessarily make 'em
yield; they are insolent upon the Dammage they did
the Grand Signior's Galleys at the siege of the same
Fortress; it concerns so many honourable Turks, and
Valiant Ianizaries as are here to go on, for the honour
of your Nation and Empire, as the most justifiable
cause of this VVarr; for though Cambaya hath
Armies and Souldiers, 'tis not for the Grand Signior's
repute, with Forein force, to revenge his injuries. I
therefore put you upon this design, that none else
might Rob you of the glory of so just vengeance;
this same Ground you now tread upon, covers the
Bones of your Comrades, Kindred, and Friends, who
(me-thinks call upon every one of us by Name) telling
us the Deaths and VVounds, they from these
Murtherers receiv'd, hoping by your Prowess to rest
reveng'd. These are those who kill'd Badur, ingratefull
for benefits, presuming too farr on the Majesty
of so great a Prince; the revenging of whom, will be
acceptable to all Kings, necessary to us who are his
Subjects.
         
         29. Having made an end of his Speech, either desiring,
more to justifie the VVarr,He sends again to the Captain of Dio. or gain time for the
expectance of supplies, he try'd Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
with harder terms, resolutely insisting on the Building
up the VVall, and demanding that the Ships of the
Soltan, (his Master) might Sail freely up and down
without passes from our Generals, an affront, which,
the Sultan bore as a Friend, but could not endure as a
Prince:History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7. Lib. 1. He further requir'd that the Merchants Ships
might not be oblig'd to put in at that Port; which was

a Liberty he ought to grant for the benefit of Trade.
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas return'd answer,The Captains answer. that, friendly
Treaties were not to be made amidst Drums and Guns;
that, 'twas the Custom of that Fort to give Laws to
every one, not to receive 'em from any; that he hop't
shortly to Banish him for a breaker of the Peace, when
to his grief, he should accept of worse Conditions
which should be writ with the very Blood of his Ianizaries.
         30. The Governour, by this time, had, with strange
Expedition, made ready nine Vessels, telling the Souldiers
who went on 'em, that in so Honourable a design,
only his Favourites were to be trusted; that he would
now change the Confinement of his Place, for the liberty
of any Souldier; that, though he was resolvd in
Person to go raise the siege of Dio, he could not dissemble
the Envy he had to those who were first to
Grapple with the Turks, and presently calling for his
Son,
               
                  Basiliscos medonhos, & lioens
                  Trabucos feros, minas encubertas,
                  Sustenta Mascarenhas con baroens
                  Que taon ledos as mortes tem por certas
                  Ate que nas mayores oppressoens
                  Castro libertador, fazendo offertas
                  Das vidas de seus filhos, quer que fiquem
                  Com fama eterna, e a Deos se sacrifiquem.
               
               
                  Drakes, horrid Basilisks, Engines of Wood
                  As bad as either, secret Mines and Plots,
                  Hath Mascarenhas with his men withstood
                  Meeting their certain Deaths with willing Throats,
                  When in the utmost stress of Flesh and Blood
                  Castro their freer his two Sons devotes,
                  That everlasting honour they may gain,
                  And sacrifices to their God be slain.
               
               Camo. Can. 10. St. 69.
            
Dom Fernando, told him in the publick Hall;
I send you Son with this relief to Dio,The Governour sends his Son Dom Fernando to Dio. which (as
I'me inform'd, is now besieg'd by a great Army
of Turks;) for what concerns your own Person
take no care, for, for every stone of that Fortress
would I venture a Son, I charge you to remember

from whom you come, who are by Kindred your Ancestors,
by their Exploits your Example; strive to
deserve the Name you Inherit, considering that by
Birth all are equal, and men only differenc't by their
Actions, and that I tell you, he who returns most
Honourable shall be my Son; That's the blessing our
Fore-fathers left us, to Dye gloriously for our Laws,
for our King, and for our Country. I put you in the
way of honour, 'tis in you now to winn it. With that
he gave him his blessing, and recommended him to
Diogo de Reynoso, one of the bravest Cavalliers who
came for India; In this relief was Sebastion de Sa, Son
to Iohn Rodriguez de Sa, who, in this occasion, and
others gave remarkable proofs of his Courage, there
went too with him, Dom Francisco de Almeyda, Son to
Dom Lopo, to be a Companion to two Brothers he
had in Dio; there were in the same relief, Antonio da
Cunha, Pero Lopez de Sousa, Diogo da Sylva, Iorge Mascarenhas,
Antonio de Mello, and many other Gentlemen,
who then pursud dangers as if they fled from 'em.
         31. The Governour writ a very civil Letter to Dom
Iohn Mascarenhas, telling him how much greater it was
on this occasion to be Commander of Dio then Governour
of India; that he had in that relief sent him his
Son Dom Fernando, that if ever he return'd into the
Kingdome, he might amongst the Vanities of his Old
age tell of his being a Souldier under him; that he
might be confident, all the strength the State could
make should be ingag'd in the Defence of that Fortress;
that there were on those Ships many young
Gentlemen, whose forwardness it behoov'd him to
temper, because men Besieg'd were only to stand upon
their Defence; that he had there sent him, as much
Ammunition as would expect a second Relief, two Engineers,
and a great many ordinary Work-men (with
Instruments and Materials for that purpose) to make
up the Breaches of the Enemies batteries: In which
Dom Iohn de Castro shew'd not only the zeal of a publick

Minister, but the experience of a Souldier, by foreseeing
their extremities and preventing 'em.
         32. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas had Commanded a
Bridge (which went from Saint Iames's work for the
convenience of the Garrison over to the other side) to
be broken down, and the making of a Draw-bridge in
stead of it.The Capain of Dio disposeth of the Commands of the Fo. Saint Iames his Tower he committed to
the charge of Alonso de Bonifacio Clerk of the Customhouse,
Saint Thomas's work to Luis de Sousa, St. Iohn's
to Gil Coutinho, that which was over the Gate to Antonio
Freire, and another work of Saint Iames's which
commanded the River to Dom Iohn de Almeyda and his
Brother Dom Pedro de Almeyda, Saint Georges to Antonio
Pecama, the Fause-bray to Iohn de Venezeanos, and the
Curtain to Antonio Rodriguez; amongst those Officers
he divided one hundred and seventy Souldiers,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7. Lib. 1. He and
thirty more were Supernumerary to help upon occasions.
Dom Iohn with so few men expected so great an
Army as came against him; providing with so much
security for his Defence, as if the danger was neither
feard or unexpected. He ordered the Ammunition and
Provision to be kept very strictly, because the hindrance
of the Weather, and the Enemy, made the receipt of
any more uncertain. He set the Slaves and those who
were not fit to bear Arms, to bring Lances, Powder,
Stones, and Provision to the Works, that the Souldiers
might not be taken up in any thing but Fighting; in
this Work he employ'd too the Children, the Old men,
and the Women, so that there was not in the Fortress
Person, or Sex idle or unserviceable, and calling them
together upon the Parade of the Fortress, he smilingly
spake to 'em;
         33. Those Turks, and Ianizaries you see from
hence,and speaks to his Souldiers. are come to winn of us the Honour they lost
in the first Siege, yet are they not more considerable
then those who were beaten, nor we less then those
who overcame; I confess to you I envy the meanest
Souldier who kept this place, because the memory of

his Valour doth yet honour his Posterity, whom we
know not so well by their Name, Country, or Birth,
as by being the Sons, or Grand-children of those who
so gloriously fell, or triumph'd in Dio. The greatest
honour'd their Families, the meanest begun theirs.
Fortune hath brought us upon such an other action;
those stout Portuguese had not Buried with 'em all
the glory of Fighting, they have left us what will
make us famous. Let not the inequality of our Forces
fright us, for Renown is not to be purchas'd by ordinary
dangers; we have Sail'd five thousand Leagues
only to find out this Day, and in it to gain that honour
neither Kings or Countries can give us; for
Kings give Rewards, not Deserts; we want not Provision
or Ammunition to hold out the Siege till Relief
arrives, and though in this Season the Seas are
high, yet have we a Iohn de Castro (who with his
Sword in his mouth will come under the Waves to
help us) and so many other Gentlemen and Persons
of Quality who will think themselves injur'd if without
them we gain the honour which is before us;
after which we are not to look for any thing more
from Fortune, being to be put on their List who
have memorably serv'd their King and Country, for
the keeping up of whose Honour we are come from
farthest West-ward thus remote; and (what's above
all) we Fight against the Enemies of our Faith, and
in so just a cause cannot want owning, since we serve
the God of Victories.
         
         34. When the Speech was ended, there was in the
Turks Camp heard a great Shooting, by which Coge-Sofar
welcom'd a Relief of two thousand Foot, which
were come to him from Cambaya, all old Souldiers,
who made the succour more considerable by its quality,
then number; there came with these two of the
Mogull's Commanders, Persons very much Cry'd up by
their own men. The same day there came in a great
part of the Nobility from the Court, which at some

distance from the Leaguere, Lodg'd themselves in Rich
Tents,There comes in more Relief to the Enemies. with such Order, as wanted nothing of the
Discipline of Europe; Our men, by not valuing their
Lives, put off the Terrour of such great preparations,
encouraging one the other by Discourses suitable to the
occasion, taking Counsel of their necessity how to behave
themselves.
         35. The next day (which was Maunday Thursday
in the year 1546.)They begin to batter the fort. there appear'd betimes in the
Morning near our Fortress a solid work of Earth, with
its Skit-gates, and in them some great Pieces, and on top
of the work a great many Sacks of Cotton, cover'd with
Raw hides to resist the Fire, a thing, which for the little
noise and time it was contriv'd in, much startled our
men, and did not look like the design of a Confus'd
and Barbarous multitude, who, whilst the Siege lasted,
shew'd as much Valour, as Discipline; they presently
began, with a great deal of success, to batter our Fort,
dismounting four of our Gunns, which did the greatest
Dammage to their Battery.
         36. That days good fortune Counsell'd 'em for the
rest,A Stratagem of the Enemies in a Ship. making in five Nights as many Forts, at a proportionable
distance, to give by the several Breaches a general
assault, which so few Defendants so divided would
not be able to withstand; the success might have answer'd
the design, had not our Fort which lay on the
Sea, and commanded theirs, done 'em so much harm,
that they thought fit to look to their own Reparations
before our Offence; the great Gunns were silent for
two days, in which they contriv'd a second Fabrick to
secure their first.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. They put to Sea a Tall Ship, full of
Powder, Stone-pitch, and other Combustible matter,
this they laid on the first Deck, as a Stratagem prepar'd
for a second design, over this they made a false Deck,
capable of two hundred Fighting men, as if with them
designing to Scale: The Ship so lay, as to command
that part of the Fort, whether, they concluded, our
men upon their advantage of place to Fight on, and

numbers, would probably come, when in the heat of
the Conflict, quitting the Ship, they would set her on
Fire, which lighting on the Fort, might burn it without
any Dammage or Danger to their own men; and
that presently entring on the ruins the Fire had left,
they would on them cast up an other, whence they
might batter our Fortress, and by this new work secure
their former, and so their Gunns play securely. A Stratagem
grounded on Soldier-like conclusions.
         37. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas had (by some Spies he
had in the Camp) notice of the Machine and design,
and calling to him Iacome Leyte, Commander at Sea, a
Souldier of great trust, told him he would not Rob
him of the honour belong'd to his employment; that
he thought the first Atchievement of this Siege ought
to be his, and acquainting him with the advice he had,
gave him Orders to be ready in the second VVatch.
Iacome Leyte put to Sea at the hour appointed in two
Boats with thirty Souldiers, and Rowing quietly till
he came up with the Ship, began to cast in her a great
many Pots of Powder.Set on Fire by our men, The Moors at once saw their
danger, and the Fire burning 'em, and running to their
Arms, distracted by fear and sleep, did faintly and confusedly
defend themselves, hindring one an other by the
Noise and Tumult so unexpected an Onset had caus'd:
some began to throw themselves into the Sea, who
shew'd the way and example to the rest; at last, with
Complaints and Clamors they left the Ship, giving the
Alarum to the whole Camp. Iacome Leyte had time
enough to make fast a Cable to the Ship, and tow her
after his;and brought to the Fort. The Captain receiv'd him with Praises and
Embraces, making more of this success, because it so
happily began the Warr. The Moors, though with
eminent danger, continued their Battering, for every
stone they unloosned of the Fortress, paying Souldiers,
and Canoneers, their Battery did no considerable harm,
only Saint Iames's Bastion, being the weakest or the
most Batter'd, was open in two places, and the Breaches

wide enough to enter upon assault; though those within
defended themselves with Retrenchments, and by
Night stole Earth to make up the Breaches.
         38. The Battery continued not without Execution,
the Wall being in many places open, every where shattered,
and not a Souldier could peep through the Battlements,
who was not peirc't with the Enemies Arrows,
or wounded with their Shot, which was so thick
as it appear'd to be a continual Discharging, Coge-Sofar
little valuing the spending Ammunition, or venturing
Soldiers, as being sufficiently furnish't and stock't with
both; He was too, answered by our Gunns from the
Fortress, and with more Dammage, for the Moors being
in multitudes, not a Bullet was spent in vain.
         39. The Turks were earnest to go on upon the
Assault, because in many places the Battery had done
Dammage enough to scale the Wall, yet did Coge-Sofar
keep them off, expecting more Force, or willing by
continual Duty and Wounds to abate the height of
our men, whose eagerness he hop't by slow Fighting to
tame, and waste the Forces, Ammunitions, and Patience
of the Besieged; an Argument not altogether out of
the way, for the Winter, which had begun furiously,
took away the possibility of that succour which was
necessary, and wanted from the first day, for the carelesness
of Peace and suddain invasion of the Enemy had
made ours unprovided to endure the weight of that
Warr, their confidence in that kind being so extravagant,
that since the siege Antonio da Sylveira held out,
the place was only kept by the repute of that Victory;
and Dom Iohn Mascarenhas had no more then forty
Barrils of Powder for Canon, and twenty for Musquets,
scarcity of Provisions, as well as of Men, who saw the
VVarr before they expected it, the Defendants were
but two hundred, most of them Garrison-Souldiers,
who were to have their first credit by that Siege.
         40. The Captain was not a little troubled at the
State of things, and the uncertainty of relief, which, it

concern'd him as cautiously to keep from his own as the
Enemy, neither would he in the beginning of the Siege
stint the Provision, and Ammunition, seeing, one way,
the ill consequence,
               
             the other, the necessity of doing
it; when the VVatch came to tell him there appear'd
nine Sail, which seem'd by their Built to be Ours, the
transport of this News brought all the Souldiers on the
VVall.History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 9. Lib. 1. The distance, and closeness of the VVeather
made them of different Opinions, but within an hour
they made the Colours of the Squadron, and presently after
the Admiral with the King's Arms, which by contrary
VVinds was working it up towards our Fortress; they
all had their Pendants flying, and Flaggs of defiance
in the main top; they immediately saluted the Towers,
who return'd them the same Sea-civility. The Moors
from the Shore made many a Shot at them whilst they
cast Anchor; They first unladed the Ammunition and
Provision, afterwards the Souldiers, and last of all
Dom Fernando went on shore, which was either the Fathers
advice, or the Sons gallantry.
         41. The Commander in chief, having receiv'd those
Gentlemen as Companions of his Fortune, knowing of
Dom Fernando's coming, went to seek him on Board, and
met him on the steps of the Fortress as he was coming
up, he took him in his Arms, and spake to him as time
and place requir'd,Dom Iohn Mascarenhas receives him. offering him his own Lodging,
which Dom Fernando would not accept, desiring him to
reserve that honour till they had Peace; that for the
present, that part of the works where was the greatest
danger should be his Chamber; that his Sleep would
do him no good, one step from the Wall; Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas again embrac't him, wondring, in so Green
years, to meet so Manly a temper.
         42. There came in the Ships good store of Powder,
Arms, and Provision, with which they might hold out
the Siege till fresh Relief; neither did the Governour
forget to send Physick and Regallos for the Sick and
Wounded. The Commander shew'd the Souldiers the

Governours Letter, in which (as we said) he secur'd
him of his coming, for which he was providing with
the greatest diligence and strength the State was capable
of, which put new hearts into the Besieged, and
made them look with an other Face upon the exigencies
and preparations of the Warr, which was like to
continue, Coge-Sofar receiving every day supplies, and
laying new designs, for which he had from diverse places
brought Engineers, who were, by ambition and reward,
put upon new inventions, which made our men more
sollicitous for the danger they saw not, then for that
before 'em.
         43. The Governour,
               
             after having dispatch't his Son
Dom Fernando, gave Order for Proclaiming a Warr
at Fire and Sword against the King of Cambaya, as one
who was perjur'd, and had broke the Peace betwixt him
and the State: this he did with Warlike and Legal
solemnities, thereby to publish, and justifie the motives
of a Warr, which kept in suspence the judgments of the
whole East. He writ to the Inhabitants of Bacaim,
minding them, that as nearest, they were oblig'd to
succour Dio, that other places help't in the States danger,
they in their own, the Gunns which battered Dio,
shaking the Houses of Bacaim; that he was providing
to go raise the Siege, and use all imaginable Hostility
against Cambaya, because the State never had a defensive
VVarr with the Kings of the East; that he desir'd
'em to be ready to accompany him with Ships and Men,
as was to be expected from so many Honourable Citizens,
and Loyal Portuguese; that he left it to themselves
what they would do for the Service, looking that
every one out of Loyalty and Love to his King, should
out-go his possibility.
         44. He writ in the same manner to all those places
from which he could receive any help, finding them
dispos'd to the Service, and for that to the spending their
Estates: an happiness which we must reckon upon as
peculiar in his Government, as on diverse occasions

the History will shew. He fell upon providing the Fleet
with a great deal of earnestness,He borrows of the Merchants. and finding the State
too poor for such an expence, ask't great summs of the
Merchants upon his word (which was the Gold and
Diamonds he only laid up) a Pawn on which all men
of Trading offer'd him what they had; I know not if
now amongst men of Power Estates of that nature go
currant for so much. He ordered publick and private
Prayers to be made,He goes to God by publick Prayers beseeching God, since t'was his
own, to protect the cause of the Faithfull, relying more
upon Sacrifice, then Arms; his ordinary discourse was
with Experienc't men about the business of Dio, and
was more inclin'd by the reason, then the authority of
the Votes.
         45. Our Arms in Dio did not grow rusty. The Commander
having advice that there was expected to be
put into the Army a great Caravan of Provisions, which
were to be Laden on the Coast betwixt Balsar and
Damaon, upon it sent forth the Sea-Commander
Iacome Leyte with three Ships, to lye about the Island
Dos Mortos, who by Night getting over the Barr and
Sailing along the Shore,They take a great deal of Provisions from the Enemy. took by it a great many Vessels
which came to furnish the Army, he put the Moors
to the Sword except some he kept to hang at the Yards
Arms when he came over the Barr; which he did, presenting
the Army with a Lamentable sight, who had
too the Confirmation of what had past by the Fire they
saw burning the Vessels, the Provisions were brought
into the Fortress, which were what they then most
wanted.
         46. Coge-Sofar had already lost a great many men,
without seeing the Fortress or minds of the Besieged
shaken to flatter his hopes of getting it. Out men
walk't upon the VVall with wanton Ornaments and
Feathers, to shew their pleasure in, or contempt of the
VVarr they were engag'd in. Coge-Sofar, seeing us with
so inconsiderable a strength Masters at Sea, and that
the Provisions his Army had came by stealth or in

danger, ordered the setting out Fleet from Surrate,
which met with three Ships of ours coming from Bacaim
and Chaul to furnish the Fortress; the Portuguese
fought very desperately, but by the Odds of their
strength, most of them Dy'd, who sold their Life at such
a rate, that the Moors had no cause to rejoyce in either
the Prize or Victory. Dom Fernando de Castro ask't
leave of the Commander in Chief to go with some
Ships to their help, which he did not grant, knowing
'twould be labour lost, for the Enemy stole out and
presently retir'd.
         47. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas thought of advising the
King by Land how things were with him;The Captain sends News over Land to the King. there was
fit for that purpose an Armenian, skilld in the Language
and Customs of the Moors; he was sent away in a light
Brigantine, which was to set him on shore on the Coast
of Por, thence in a Iogues cloaths (which is amongst
them a Religious and poor Habit) he was to go to
Cinde, and from thence to Ormus with Letters to the
Captain; He travelld in the company of some Basora
Merchants, who by the River Euphrates carry'd him to
Babylon, where he was to stay for the Caravans to go
over the deserts of Arabia.
         48. Coge-Sofar carry'd on his works with no less
danger then toil, and with so Cruel and Barbarous a
resoluteness, that he us'd the Bodies of those Pioneers
our men Kill'd, for filling up the Ditch; using so inhuman
a Discipline, to cover perhaps the loss which
novv began to be knovvn in the Army, though made up
by daily Reliefs vvhich continually fill'd the Camp.
Coge-Sofar, vvhere the advantage vvas most, planted
sixty great Pieces, of which there vvere Basilisks,
Salvages,Names of Canon. Eagles and Camells, besides less Gunns vvhich
exceeded that number; He secur'd the five vvorks he
had rais'd vvith nevv VValls, and covered the Pioneers
vvith crooked Traveses of so many vvindings that our
Guns could not come at 'em;The Enemies command the Fossee. The Moors by this means
commanded the Fossee of the Fort, where they had

planted eighteen Basilisks, which plaid for a fortnight
together, with so much Dammage, as our men
for their last remedy defended themselves with the very
ruins, making Forts retrenchments and reparations of
the stones which had been thrown down.
         49. We had now lost fourscore men, and had more
then an hundred VVounded, besides the scarcity and
badness of the Provisions had made many sick; most of
the Ammunition was spent, and by it our men brought
into a great deal of danger, which Coge-Sofar having
notice of by some Slaves who run away from the Fortress,
ordered the Batteries should be re-inforc't, believing
the hearts of such shattered Forces could not hold
out;History of India, Dec. 6 Lib. 2. Cap. 1. and as one, who would divide with his Prince the
smiles of Fortune, sent to the Sultan, who was at
Champanel, to come to the Camp, to put the Fortress
on the first assault into his hands; upon the credit of
that promise the Sultan came with ten thousand Horse,The Sultan comes with a great Army.
and most of his Court, he was receiv'd with a Vollee
Royal, seconded with diverse Instruments of Warr and
Mirth, Musick which ours heard, as abating their
Courage, and grating their Ears.
         50. Our men believ'd that the Mirth in the Camp,
so Solemniz'd with repeated Vollees, was to welcome
those Turks they look't for; Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
presently commanded Fernaon Cavalho Commander of
the Fort next the Sea, to set out a little Boat to know
what past amongst the Enemy, (the Spies he had in
the Camp, being either Treacherous, or Discovered)
which was done that very Night, and a Moor brought
us, who told us of the Sultans coming, Coge-Sofar's
promises, and the confidence they had of their design.
The Commander freed the Moor, and bid him from
him desire the King of Cambaya to stay in the Army, for
he hop't to come and Visit him in his quarters. The
Moor rejoyc't at his Liberty, and wondred at the
Captains answer; being brought before Mahumud, and
repeating the Captains words, he told him, the Portuguese

had their Fort thrown down, and their Hearts
whole.
         51. Coge-Sofar commanded they should continue
Battering, and bid Simaon Feo (one of ours whom he
had against the Law of Arms detain'd Prisoner) tell
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, that he wondred to see him so
pent up, without Sallying out to Fight in the Field,
as did the brave Cavallier Antonio da Sylveira, that his
actions very much disagreed with his words; our men
answered the message with Bullets from the Wall; the
Battery lasted five hours, not without doing a great deal
of Dammage to the Buildings, which were tottering
before; yet our Shot return'd it with more loss, and
better fortune, for a Bullet at randome kill'd a Moor in
the Sultan's Tent, as he was discoursing with him; and
the Eastern Moors credulously addicted to Omens, the
King looking upon what had hapned, as a warning of
some mischief which was coming (perhaps dissembling
his fear by his Superstition) immediately went out of
the Field,He retires and lewes Iuzcaon in his place. leaving behind him Iuzarcaon, a stout Abessine,
who in the Mogull's Warrs serv'd against Sultan
Mahumed, and now as a Souldier of fortune, was by
some advantages perswaded to take pay in this Warr.
         52. The King, having left the Tents, stouter in Peace
then Fight, and retiring to his pleasure House of Melique
on the same Island, did hasten relief, which daily recruited
the Camp. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, who in so
close Siege knew no certainty of the Enemies designs,
was talking vvith the Cavalliers and Gentlemen how
much it concern'd 'em to get some advice. Diogo de
Anaya Coutinho,A fmous action of Digo de Anaya. (a Gentleman vvho Liv'd upon his Pay,
yet of bravery becoming his Birth) hearing this discourse,
offer'd himself to the Captain, and let down
by a Cord from the top of the Wall, protected by the
darkness of the Night, went to the Enemies quarters,
he had not gone farr, but he spy'd two Moors talking
hard by him, he scrupled to set upon 'em, because to
carry off two was impossible, to fight with 'em inconvenient,

but advising with the occasion,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. he Knock't
down one of 'em with his Lance, and closing with the
other (who by Crying out biting and strugling defended
himself) carry'd him to the Gates of the Fortress,
where he found the Corps of Guard, who with Praises
and Envy, brought him and his Prisoner to the Captain.
I will now relate a Circumstance greater then the
action, Diogo de Anaya had borrow'd a Head-piece of a
Souldier, and missing it when he was in the Fortress,
thinking he had lost it in striving and closing with the
Moor, went by the same Cord down the VVall, and
looking it in the sight of an incenst Army, found it, and
brought it back, not less rash then fortunate.
         53. By the News the Moor brought, the Captain
knew, that Coge-Sofar and Iuzarcaon, this stout, the
other desperate, had both mutually Vow'd to Mahomet
to take Dio, or perish in the design; that, if they could
not brook us when vve vvere Friends, they should not
endure us when Conquerours. By their continual
Battering many of their great Guns burst, instead of
which they sitted others, shooting impetuously against
Saint Iohns, Saint Thomas, and Saint Iames's Bastions,
Commanded by Dom Iohn de Almeyda, Lovis de Sousa,
and Gil Coutinho, who slept always in their Armour, in
danger constant, unwearied in duty.
         54. Saint Iames's Bastion was the weakest and most
battered, and the Turks in that fought with our men
upon very little disadvantage. There was not in the
Portress Parapet or Battlement which was not thrown
down, and from Saint Iohns to Saint Iames's Bastion
all the Curtain was open, which made the duty of the
Day be seconded by the labour of the Night, it being
not possible, yet necessary for so few Defendants, so
broken, to repair in a few hours the ruins of a Fortress
so every where Battered, yet did they unanimously
betake themselves to that Labour, they could neither
master or excuse.
         55. The Women of the Fortress help't to bring Materials

for the making up the Breaches,The courage of the Women of Dio. going without
any fear upon the Wall, stumbling at Lances, Swords,
and Bullets, mastring their Nature and Sex, as if they
wore men's hearts in a disguise: some there were who
put on Arms and brav'd the Enemy, running from their
Needle to a Lance, from their Couch to the VVall;
of all the rest Isabell Fernandez deserv'd the greatest
glory, whom (instead of Praises to honour her Memory)
our VVriters call the Old woman of Dio, famous
by this name in the Annals and Memorials of the
East. This great Matron spent part of her Estate in
Junkets and Regallos,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. with vvhich in the heat of the
dispute she fed the Souldiers, animating 'em (with Arguments
above the courage and judgment of a VVoman)
to defend themselves by Fighting. This diligence
of the Matrons (which readily and seasonably put
'em upon any thing, were it servile, or hazardous) was
in fine a lightning their Labour, and an example in
Dangers.
         56. Coge-Sofar, seeing that the mischief his Arms
did by Day our industry repair'd by Night, contriv'd a
design more subtil in the laying of it, then usefull by
the success. Against Saint Thomas's work, (vvhich by its
make and place lay most obnoxious) he resolv'd to
cast up an other which should equal or command it,
that by Battering it from above he might throw down
the Battlements, so hindring the Defendants from Fighting,
and from making up their Breaches by night, his
Guns being so Levell'd by day as to be sure of their
aim. He presently ordered vvhole mountains of Earth,
and brush Fagotts to be brought to fill up the Ditch,
and strengthned the Counterscarp vvith bodies of
great Trees, to keep up the Earth. The multitude of
Pioneers vvho vvere in the Camp made up an other
Army, vvho without fear or time carry'd on the vvork.
In the interim the Guns from our work plaid to the
great loss of the Enemy, for the Work-men being so
thick and expos'd, not one Shot from the Fortress was
lost.
         
            
57. Coge-Sofar, considering the greatness of the loss,
gave order they should work by Night, when our shootting
being without aim and at Rovers the Execution
would be less, commanding them to make the most
Noise, where they Work't least, that our Canoneers
led by their Ear, might point their Ordnance as the
Sounds and Ecchos reach't them. This was known to
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, who fill'd the Fortress with
Lights that the Pioneers who work't on the security
of the Night, might be expos'd to the same danger as
by day; but Coge-Sofar (who had learn't Experience
in the Warrs of Europe) gave order for the making of
crooked and cover'd Trenches, by which the Moors
more securely went on with the raising their Fort, and
we vainly to our loss spent store of our Bullets.
         58. The Captain was not a little troubled at it, for
if that work went forward there would not be any secure
place in the Fortress, the Enemies Canon commanding
our Fortifications; so that between the Besiegers
and Besieg'd there would be no advantage of
place, and that of numbers the Moors had eminently
above us. Upon debate of the matter in Counsel every
one knew the danger, none the remedy. Some, with
more Courage the Prudence, were for our mens Sallying
forth with apparent danger to interrupt their
work, not considering the hazard they run upon, to be
greater then that they freed themselves from; but few
consented to this advice, yet none could give other.
Some Sallies ours made but to little purpose, for the
Numbers and Vigilancy of the Enemy secur'd with a
great Guard the Posts of the Work-men. But in great
Straights danger being usually the best Counsellour,
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas bethought himself of an eminency
in the Fortress, which was higher then Saint Thomas's
Fort, from whence our Guns might play; here he made
some Pieces be planted, which did so lucky Execution,
as in a few days they beat down that Machine, which
in its raising and falling cost the Blood of those who

Built it. But this Hydra being of so many Heads, with
the same ruins Coge-Sofar set upon the filling up the
Ditch, which was easier for him, being a Work that
needed neither measure, design, or fore-cast.
         59. Two thousand Pioneers began with the materials
of the Fort to fill up the Ditch, and whilst 'twas
doing a great body from the Army with Darts, Arrows,
and Musquet-shot, kept our men from coming to the
Wall. The work increast as did the danger of the Besieged,
for the Fortress being ruin'd above, the plain
ground with but little raising would be equal to the
Wall. The Captain laid about to frustrate his design,
and being irresolv'd how, some Old men (brought up
in the Fortress) told him that by their quarters there
was a Sally-port in the VVall, which length of time
had covered with loose Earth; that, by that, without
any danger, and with a great deal of ease, might be
stole away the Earth they brought to fill up the Ditch.
The necessity demanded speedy Execution, the Captain
commanded men to Digg, and found a Sally-port
fit for his purpose. Our men Sallied out in the Night,
and stole the Rubbish which was undermost,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. leaving a
hollow superficies which covered the hollowness, solid
in appearance to the Enemies, and as the ground was
expos'd to the violence of the Weather it sunk of it
self, with the fall of all that imaginary Superstructure
in sight of the Enemy.
         60. Coge-Sofar had presently intelligence of the way
we took to delude that which cost him so much pains,
and coming to that place (out of impatience to see
all his designs Counterplotted) there came out of the
Fortress a Bullet shot at randome which took off his
Head,Coge-Sofar Dyes of a 
             in the middle of a Squadron of Turks. There
was in the Army a general resentment for the loss of so
great a Souldier. Our men saw them with inarticulate
Lamentations, and drag'd Colours bury the Body, with
all the Military and Civil ceremony the vanity of VVarr
could teach 'em: His Son Rumecaon swore presently by

the Blood of his Father, to be reveng'd of it, grief and
anger being amongst them the last Sacrifice offer'd to
their Dead.
         61. Rumecaon succeeded his Father in his Enmity,
and Charge,Rumecaon his Son succeeds him. carrying on the Warr with the Obligation
of a General, and Resentment of a Son, engag'd both
by his grief and office. He commanded the filling up
the Ditch should in six several places be gone on with,
the Army being hourly furnish't with Pioneers, Provisions,
Munition, and Souldiers, and the work every
where rising, which Rumecaon hastned on, as a disposition
to a general assault; by comparing designs, he too
bethought himself to go on with contrivances that his
Father had begun; He made six cover'd approaches,
all which ended at the Sally-port of our Fortress, by
which ours had tane away the Earth, these met upon a
wooden Bridge, which we had made there, out of design
under it to steal the Earth; upon this they were
making the Fabrick we spake of, charging the Bridge
with Stones and Timber, of such a bigness as the weight
sunk it, and it presently fell to the ground with the loss
of those who were at work under it. The Commander
seeing this, ordered the shutting up of the Sally-port,
the use of it being tane away, and to avoid any suddain
invasion of the Enemy, who without any interruption
work't on; while we were Hammering out, any Plot,
or open Force to defeat so dangerous a Fabrick, on
confidence of which, the Moors (by their Festivals and
Shouting) seem'd already rather to enjoy then expect
the Victory.
         62. Those cares were seconded by others of no less
weight, for there were not now in the Fortress two
hundred Fighting men, some being wore out by Duty,
others by Sickness, and Wounds, and had more need of
recovering their strength, then exposing it in second
dangers. Amongst the common Souldiers distrust made
way for fear; Provision, and Ammunition were scarce;
the stormy Seas and cruel VVinter cut off all hopes of

relief; for, either to send for't or receive it, the Season
was not convenient.
         63. Iohn Coelho was Vicar of the Fortress,The Vicar Iohn Coelho goes to the Governour. who had
besides the Virtues of Priesthood resolution enough to
go upon any danger; He offered himself to the Command,
(which was very acceptable to him) in spight
of storms to venture to Sea, and touching at Bacaim,
or Chaul, as an Eye-witness to acquaint the Commanders
how things stood, thence too, by Corriers over
Land to give the Governour intelligence, promising on
his Habit to return with the first news to Dio as a faithfull
Companion of their Fortunes. The Commander
presently provided him a Catch with twelve Mariners,
where wee'l leave him wrastling with the Waves, till
we are to give an account of the success of so stout and
pious a Voyage.
         64. The Moors by force work't in filling up the
Ditch, imperious and cruel Rumecaon commanding
them to Dye, or continue Working; for their reward,
receiving in the very act, a miserable Grave. They at
last came to lay the Ditch plain, and against Gil Coutinho's
works where it could not be fill'd, they laid cross
great Masts, with planks fastned to 'em, which they
made use of for a Bridge, under that to ruine the VVall,
which our Guns could not hinder 'em in, for they were
cover'd.
         65. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas immediately ordered
great Chains, to throw them from the VVall on the
Bridge, there hung at 'em Sacks of shreds dipt in Gunpowder,
Salt-peter, and other Combustible matter,
which being thrown, fir'd so violently on the Bridge, as
presently to ruine it. Rumecaon came to make good the
work with new Planks, more VVork-men, and Souldiers,
these defended the place, the others continued
Labouring; which our men endeavoured to interrupt
by their Canon and Musquet shot, which did very much
hurt the Enemy; but Rumecaon went on so obstinately,
that he made fresh men pass over the Dead, who though

forc't upon't, overcome the danger by their Obedience.
By so chargeable a way of working, he at last came to
fill up the Ditch.
         66. Rumecaon,Propositions offered to our men by Rumecaon. by the few Defendants who supply'd
the Posts, knowing how the case stood with us, had a
mind to sound our Inclinations, believing in so dangerous
a Conjuncture, Reason and Nature would teach us
not to throw away our Lives. At the beginning of the
Night, those on Saint Iames's work heard one calling
to the VVatch in Portuguese, saying, he was Simaon Feo,
who upon some extraordinary business would speak
with the Commander in chief.History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 4. Lib. 2. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
had presently notice of it, and entring into discourse
with the Souldier, he told him, that he was Simaon Feo,
sent by Rumecaon, who had a mind, out of his affection
to the Courage of so great Souldiers, to save their
Lives, they now desperately defended; that they saw
the Fortress every where Ruin'd, the greatest part of
the Souldiers sick, or VVounded, without any hope of
relief, in vvant of Provisions and Ammunition; that
vve should not by perishing obstinately, discredit by the
rashness of a few, the greatness of our Actions; that
vve vvould give up our selves, he desiring for his own
glory to keep alive so brave Enemies; that he vvould
give us all Honourable terms, leaving us the disposal of
our Estates, and Ships for our passage, vvhich if vve accepted
not, vve vvere to look to endure the rigour of
VVarr, and that Licentiousness vvhich in Onslaughts is
Authoriz'd by Indignation and Victory. Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas answered him, that the Fortress the Portuguese
kept needed no VValls; that in the open Field
they vvould defend it against the strength of the vvhole
VVorld; that on the first assault he should learn this
truth, that he ought to bethink himself of sending to
the Sultan for more men, and better Souldiers; that the
Portuguese scorn'd such small Victories; that he hop't
with Heads of Turks to make up the ruins of the Fortress;
that if he vvanted Provisions, he vvould go look

for 'em as Booty in his Camp; that as long as his Souldiers
were Arm'd, they could want nothing in the
possession of their Enemies; that he hop'd shortly
through his arm'd Squadrons with Sword in hand to cut
out the happy passage he offered him, he told Simaon
Feo, that, though he was oblig'd to repeat an others
words, he should not return with an other message, for
he would make him be Shot from the Wall.
         67. Rumecaon seeing we fed upon Dangers, hard
Duty,The Enemy assauls ant Io's work. and Hunger, affronted too by so slight an answer,
resolv'd to give the first assault; There broke upon us
a Dismall day, (which was the nineteenth of Iuly in
the year 1546.) the Enemies Army at the Dawning,
being seen round the Fortress. Iuzarcaon with fifteen
hundred choise men fell upon Saint Iohns work, Commanded
by Luis de Sousa, with whom were Dom Fernando
de Castro, Sebastion de Sa, Diogo de Reynoso, Pero
Lopez de Sousa, Diogo da Sylva, Antonio da Cunba, and
other Gentlemen and Souldiers not passing thirty;
These with so much Bravery expected the first shock of
the Enemy, that they beat back the first fourscore who
began to Scale, who by their Out-crys, Blood, and Fall,
shew'd the loss they had receiv'd; Others presently
came after them, finding the dead Bodies had made their
Scaling easier; Iuzarcaon encouraged them, by minding
'em of their honour, their reward, and their vengeance.
The striking on the Air by the Guns, and Clamours
of men, made an hideous impression on the Walls
of the Fortress. The Battery was continued against the
other works, the assault against Saint Iohn's, and Saint
Thomas's; that those who in themselves were but few,
might being divided, sooner yield.
         68. Rumecaon with his Turks assaulted Saint Thomas's
work,And Saint Thomas's. kept by Dom Iohn de Almeyda, and Gil Coutinho;
his men pick't out for their Valour, and of a proud Nation
fell on so furiously, as though run through with
our Lances, they gave not over Scaling, seeking for
Victory in their Death; they had the advantage of

numbers, we of place, and those who had bestrid the
Wall, must either Enter Victoriously or Dye wounded,
Retiring being more dangerous, then Fighting. The
Enemy with fresh men continually re-inforced the
Assault; Ours, always the same, were too hard for the
first Assailants, and match for the last. The Women
came to their help with Arms, and Powder, putting on
that Courage which was rather seasonable then natural;
some of 'em with Regallos and Drinks put Life
into the Souldiers, and not able to show their own
strength, did encrease it in others; there were of them,
who animated 'em with Speeches, deserving to have
had in so great hearts the force of men; and amongst
the actions of this Siege we shall relate theirs as most
unusual, if not as the greatest. There was seen at the
foot of the work a Mountain of Dead bodies, some
with their Wounds bleeding, others burnt with the
Fire; some at their last Gasp, 'twixt anger and grief,
cry'd for Vengeance; sometimes too it hapned, that
those who went to Vindicate 'em Dy'd first. Our men
that day did wonders, which were more easily seen by
their success, then they can be by Writing; for in particularizing
accidents the truth is uncertain, most of all
in the chances of Warr, where anger, fear, and other
passions so captivate the judgment, that each particular
man can hardly be a faithfull Historian of his own
Actions.
         69. Dom Fernando de Castro that day gave proof of a
Courage befitting his Birth,What resistance our men made. and above his Years. Sebastian
de Sa left us a famous memory of his Valour, till
having his Knee shot through with a poyson'd Arrow,
and falling down for Dead,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 4. Lib. 2. not being able to maintain
the Fight, he would not forsake it; He was at last by
his Camrades, full of grief and envy, carry'd off, having
before sufficiently reveng'd his Blood on the Enemy.
Every one in fine behav'd himself so Stoutly, as that
one day was enough to make 'em Souldiers. After
Fighting two hours they seem'd but to begin the assault,

Rumecaon carrying himself as if in one day he intended
to make an end of the VVarr. He commanded every
Nation to Fight by themselves, either the more to Spurr
'em on by Emulation, or that they might better observe
Orders; he himself, Commanding and Fighting, by his
Voice, and Example made 'em stand to't, and not glutted
with the Blood he saw spilt, Prais'd the forwardest,
and Vilify'd the backward'st, carrying out 'midst the
horrour of Arms, his anger with prudence. Dom Iohn
Maescarenhas behav'd himself not only as a Commander,
but a Companion where the greatest danger was, Fighting,
and Commanding so prudently, that he came off
owing nothing to Courage, less to Conduct.
         70. Rumecaon,The Enemy reres with loss. seeing the great numbers of Dead
which were about the VVorks, and that his men kept
back when commanded to come on, commanded the
sounding of a Retreat, carrying off in great haste the
Dead and VVounded, so to keep from his own their
Loss, and from us our Victory; yet we had it from themselves,
that they lost in this assault five hundred men,
the VVounded were many more; there Dy'd of ours
but one Souldier, the VVounded were less then twenty.
By this disproportion 'tis seen that the Victory was
not only obtain'd by Human force, but that God maintain'd
the cause as his own; our Arms being the happy
Instruments of his Power, of which the History will
yet give us greater proofs.
         71. Upon the Enemies retiring the Commander in
Chief summon'd our men to a second Labour, which
the Necessity, or Victory made them easily digest. The
Breaches of the Fortress were of force to be made up;
the Stones and Mortar, being the soft Beds which our
Souldiers had to recover their so decaid strength with;
they all went willingly and chearfully on the Service,
led on by the example of the Commander, who after
the Enemies, Conquer'd his own Nature. The Fortress
in the morning appear'd in part repair'd, our men by
their working recovering themselves, as if they had been

at rest; the weight of their Arms not permitting them
to make any difference 'twixt Day and Night. The
Enemy was by this assault so broken, as he durst not in
many days come to Blows with us, his experience making
him more Cautious or Cowardly; He now and
then fac't the Fortress vvith some inconsiderable Piqueering,
to shake us with continual Alarums, or by our
taking our Posts, to observe the inclinations of our
minds; yet did he not leave off Battering, intending by
a long Siege to vveaken us: but the Camp daily encreasing
vvith new Recruits, and the Sultan declaring his
concernment for this Warr, Rumecaon resolv'd to give
the Fortress the second assault.
         72. And considering the loss he had receiv'd, though
Fighting vvith so much advantage of numbers, he
look't upon the slaughter of his men as having higher
Causes, for vvhich 'twas fit to appease the Prophet.Iuzarcaon falls to Superstition. He
immediately commanded the bringing forth of a Banner
vvhich had in it the Picture of Mahomet, and that
the Army vvith that should go so many times in Procession
about the Mosque, and vvith other barbarous
and ridiculous Expiation should appease and reconcile
Mahomed,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. whose displeasure retarded their Victory.
Fernaon Carvalho, Commander of the vvork toward
the Sea, saw the Army that night go in Procession vvith
great store of Lights, and by times heard Noise and
Clamours which presently ended in a suddain silence,
again bursting forth into Groans of a confus'd multitude,
their Sighs and Out-crys were seconded by Instruments
of VVarr, and in this Superstitious vanity
vvere many hours of the Night entertained. Fernaon
Carvalho was troubled at the strangeness, and could not
guess for what it was; but acquainted Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
with what he saw, who guest it a preparation
for an assault, abetted by some Barbarous ceremony and
Superstitious rite, with vvhich they hop't to reconcile
the anger of their false Prophet.
         73. The Commander in Chief made ready for this

second storm of the Enemy, finding in such shattered
Forces, all his Souldiers heart-whole, the Wounded
and Sick quitted their Beds and Cures, more eager to
go upon Dangers then recover their Health. Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas with Courage and Judgment ordered and
dispos'd what was necessary for their defence;An other assault. Daylight
was hardly broke when the Enemy appear'd before
the Fortress with Clamours and dolefull Noises, which
by the sounding of Warlike instruments were in the
silence of the Night made more Dreadfull; The Army
came up divided into three Squadrons, and had carry'd
before 'em (amongst the rest) a Baner in which was
the Image of their Prophet, that both Religion and
their King's honour might animate them; at the same
time they fell upon Saint Iohns and Saint Thomas's work,
and Antonio Pecanha's Guard with so much sury as they
neither saw or fear'd danger, but were by ours so receiv'd,
as they were with more haste forc't back, then
they came in to the Onset, many falling down Dead,
most of 'em Wounded, and others burnt by Fire. Iuzarcaon
and Rumecaon were heard to incite others to
Scale the Works, who under shelter of the Vollees of
Musquets, infinite Arrows, and other Shouting, did go on
afresh. 'Twas here the assault was Kindled in a great
deal of heat, the Turks earnest to recover their lost
Credit, were by rage and shame put upon Fighting, obstinately
getting up through Fire and Sword, like men
who less valued their Lives then the Victory, so as they
got to be on the same ground with ours, Fighting man
to man upon the Work.
         74. Louis de Sousa, Dom Fernando de Castro, with
the other Gentlemen and Souldiers of their Company
did that day give new repute to our Arms, so behaving
themselves as Rumecaon represented 'em to his men,
sometimes for their example, others as their shame; the
Turks were continually reliev'd, Ours, always the same,
shew'd themselves as stout against the last as first; the
Fight grew hot every where, of the Enemies a great

many were Kill'd and VVounded, yet did their rage or
anger, either hide or slight the loss; for, on the Body
of him who fell did an other plant himself, to fling his
Lance, or Fight more firmly, the heat and impatience
of Victory inventing new Subtilties or never heard of
Cruelties.
         75. They at last entred Saint Thomas's work,The Turks enter Saint Thomas's work. which
for a good while they kept, as some fell others coming
in their place. 'Twas here the fury of the Enemy was
great, as well as their Slaughter. Dom Francisco, and
Dom Pedro de Almeydo shew'd themselves Brothers as well
by their Soutness as Blood, withstanding the shock of so
many Enemies all the time of the assault.
         76. The Turks of Rumecaon's Division fought with
ours Body to Body, upon equality of ground, and advantage
of numbers, the danger heightning our Courage.
Few of those who entred the work got off Alive,
but having this Door open towards Victory they endeavour'd
though with eminent danger to keep it so.
This being the first honour the chance of Arms had in
the Warr conferr'd on Rumecan, he with praises and
promises rais'd the pride of the Turks. 'Twas nois'd
amongst ours the work was lost, which Alarum,
whether 'twas craft, or chance, might have lost the Fortress;
for those who fought in other places almost all
forsook their Posts to relieve the work they gave for
gone; those chiefly who Guarded the Houses toward
the Rock, came so furiously to the Relief, as the rest had
time to Breathe, who by their Duty and VVounds were
now wearied and broken.
         77. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas went about the Posts,
assuring them all, that the work was yet ours, and how
Couragiously 'twas maintain'd; that Rumecaon stood
looking on the Slaughter of his men, who cast themselves
weltring in their Blood from the VVall, and by
their fall made sure of their Deaths. The Storming
continu'd, and on both sides Death and Wounds seem'd
to add to their Courage and Bravery, which Iuzarcaon

observing, and believing those few Defendants the Fortress
had, were employ'd in those Bastions vvhich vvere
attaqu'd,
               
             leaving the Battail, vvith some Souldiers surrounded
the Wall, and coming to the Fause-bray,
vvhich vvithout art Nature had made defensable by the
height and cragginess of the Rock on vvhich too the
Sea beat, seeing it unguarded, vvithout either Souldiers
or Watch, guest that the situation made us secure of it,
and sending for a Senjack with a hundred Turks and
scaling Ladders they begun to Scale there without
being either seen or resisted; for the Souldiers who had
the Guard there, upon the news Saint Thomas's vvork
vvas lost, quitting the Post they kept, vvith more Courage
then Discipline vvent to relieve it.
         78. The Turks boldly clim'd the Rock, making their
way to some Houses, joyning to Saint Iames's Church,
which gave them passage to a Gallery where they planted
Ladders for others to come up by. Iuzarcaon stood
without encouraging 'em, believing he had stole both
the Honour and Victory from Rumecaon.History o India, Dec. 6. Cap. 6. Lib. 1. The Turks
won those Houses, and were going down into the Fortress,
and one of 'em more resolute, or diligent than the
rest, went into a Marry'd womans House, and asking
Money of her to save her Life, the poor Woman surpriz'd
with fear, made as if she went forth to procure it,
and going into her Neighbours told her in a fright, the
danger they were in, this, startled at the News, acquainted
an other,The Courage of a spain
             who with Manly prudence and
courage took up a Sphear, and going to the House
where the Turks where, saw one of 'em at Door watching
how things went abroad, and coming up to him,
laying on with her Sphear, forc't him to retire within
the Doors, with so much Mastery of her judgment in
the danger she was in, as she had the Caution to lock
the Door, and the Courage to wait on the Turks, and
hinder their coming forth, worthy certainly to have
her memory Recorded amongst the most famous Champions.
         
            
79. The women who Liv'd thereabouts being seiz'd
with so just a fear, went to look out the Commander
in Chief, crying, Turks in the Fortress; they found him
with three Souldiers running about the Works; hearing
womens Voices, not less Prudent then Couragious,
He commanded them to be silent, and took them with
him to shew him the House where the Turks were,The Captain comes in to her help. dispatching
one of the Souldiers with commands to draw
off some from the Works, where the Enemy was less
pressing, without saying any thing of the danger the
Fortress was in to those who were Fighting; he likewise
sent off an other Souldier to bring him all the scattering
men he found from Duty; by the way he light
upon Andre Bayaon with an other, and coming to the
House where the Turks were, he saw the Woman, who
kept 'em fast, and, with more then masculine Courage
disputed their coming forth; so unfortunate as to have
no reward in her Life, so no name in our History.
         80. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas looking on the so extraordinary
Valour found in a VVoman, as an Omen of
the Victory, having it from her, that the Turks were
Lockt up in the House, sent a Abessine (who by chance
was there) for a Pan of Powder, and because he
mov'd slowly, shov'd him by the Arm, when at the same
instant from the Leads of the Church, (where were
gotten some Turks) came a Bullet, which Kill'd the
Abessine, who kept it off from the Captain. There presently
came a Souldier with Powder, which Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas taking out of his hands, forcing open the
Doors, threw in amongst the Turks, the Fire burnt most
of 'em, and the Bullets which with certain aim they
Shot from within mist him, which was interpreted to
be by chance, by some others, providence. Behaving
himself that day like Commander and Souldier, cover'd
with his Buckler, and having his Sword in his hand,
with four more he set upon the Turks, and by dint of
Sword drove 'em to the Gallery,And drives out the Souldiers. where he so prest 'em,
as to make 'em throw themselves down the Rock, with

no less danger then that they fled from, most of them
Kill'd or coming off Maim'd by their fall.
         81. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas had now News,The Turks get upon th Church. that on
the Leads of the Church there appear'd a great many
Turks with two Banners planted, beginning to Shoot
our men from above as they came on; here 'twas the
danger was great, for there being no other then Firearms,
Fortune out-went Courage. VVe were less then
sixty, the Turks more then an hundred. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
seeing, that by keeping the place they encreas'd,
sent for Scaling-Ladders, chance and necessity so ordering
it, that in his own Fortress he was forc'd to become
the Assailant. Our men fastned a little Ladder
to the VVall, and the first Souldier who Ventur'd on it
vvas by the ances of the Turks immediately thrown
down; they then brought bigger and clapping 'em to
the VVall, the Commander in chief striving first to get
up, vvas by the Souldiers just violence kept from passing.
Our men got up by the VValls of the Apostle Saint
Iames's Church, confident by the place, of the Victory;
the advantage of place made great Odds in their Fighting,
the Enemy had firm footing, Ours by their hanging
in the Air broke two Ladders, for their strife and
heat vvho should first get up vvas an other VVarr. The
Commander by his vvords and example animated the
Souldiers, vvhich he did more out of his Duty then
Necessity. The Conflict vvas obstinate and resolute,
some of our men fell back Dead, none came off VVounded.
The impatience of getting oom to Climb vvork't
more upon those vvho stood below, then the Wounds
they saw their Camrades receive; for, though in so
long and dangerous a Siege they had not too much of
the Warr, they cut one an other vvith unheard of
Cruelty.
         82. Iuzarcaon encourag'd and reliev'd his, vvith
fresh men so, as in a little time he fill'd the place where
they fought, (which was the Leads or Roof of the
Church) with Souldiers. Ours at last, after a sharp

contest, at the price of their Blood got upon the Wall,
showing in the inequality of place and numbers, a
difference in Courage. Three long hours the dispute
lasted,And retire. in which time the few who were there so behav'd
themselves, as that one Action deserv'd a particular
History, yet find we not their names Recorded,
who by their Blood challeng'd so distinct a memory.
The Turks were almost all Kill'd, some by their fall,
others in the Fight, and suppos'd to be their best men,
who were singled out for so great an Action.
         83. The Commander hearing the assault lasted yet
on the Works, carry'd off his men to refresh 'em in a
second danger, and visiting the Posts, found our men so
engag'd in keeping off the Enemy, that after four hours
the assault seem'd but to begin; The Dead at the foot
of the Works were so many as they wanted ground to
lye upon, whose Bodies made the Scaling of the Wall
easier. Rumecaon without, encourag'd, or reproach'd
his men, as he saw the bravery or coldness of their Courage
in Fighting; provoking 'em by Rewards, and Punishments;
on all occasions of this Siege showing both
Resolution and Discipline. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
gave not over Ordering, and Providing what was necessary
every where, so as the Souldiers in no danger
found him wanting; On that day which was the Apostle
Saint Iames's, it appear'd the Saint would shew
us the Victory was his, and that he was not now less
Powerfull against the Moors in Asia, then he had been
before in Spain.
         84. The dispute continued hot and dreadfull on
both sides, Iuzarcaon (taking it to heart, not to compass
the Scaling of the Fortress which had cost him so
dear) came with those men under his Command, to
put more Life into the assault, when by a Bullet from
the Fortress, which hit him on the Breast, and past
through him he fell down Dead;Iuzarcaon's Death. And being a Person
of such Value, for his Courage, and the place he held,
the News was immediately disperct through the Army,

when it came to Rumecaon's Ears (was it Fear, or Compassion)
he receiv'd it vvith no little Resentment,
immediately Commanding the sounding a Retreat,
to bring off Iuzarcaon's body, a loss could not be
conceal'd from his men, and being greater then any they
had before sustain'd, they now thought the Victory not
worth what it had already cost, and if they should atchieve
it, doubted who would remain to enjoy it. That
their Prophet apparently shew'd himself angry with
them, since he could endure to see his Banner so ignominiously
torn. To these Considerations they added
others which spoke against their Generals fortune, and
the cause of the Warr; laying to his charge that they
had the worst of it. Rumecaon by diverse Artifices remedy'd
these jealousies, Palliating his own loss, and
Enhauncing ours, laying before 'em the Sulan's Favour,
and their own Fame, as the most considerable part of
that reward they were to look for.And that of many Turks. VVe lost in that
assault seven Souldiers, and had thirty VVounded; on
the Moors side the Dead were above one thousand, and
the Wounded neer two.
         85. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, after ordering the Burial
of the Dead, and the looking to the Wounded, (in
which he spar'd no Care, and less his Estate, which he
profusedly spent, without keeping account) did by a
Brigantine send the Governour word how things stood,
and of his want of Men, Ammunition, and Provisions.
Sebastion de Sa,The  in Chief adviseth the Governour. at the instance of the Commander in
Chief, and Friends, went on the Vessel, though with
these words in his mouth, that only on the work where
he was VVounded, could he recover his Health, which
every one desir'd he should preserve, because his Actions
in that Siege deserv'd no little Fame, and a much longer
Life; He recovered Bacaim when his Vessel was almost
sunk, was received and entertain'd by Dom Ieronymo de
Menezes, Captain of the Fortress there, who presently
dispatch't the Letters to the Governour, with what advice
he had from Dom Iohn Mascarenhas.
         
            
86. Dom Iohn de Castro was at that time very Sollicitous
how things went at Dio, because the Winter
kept him from having any News, or sending any Relief;
yet did he, without sparing Cost or Danger, even under
the VVaves, succour it,How the Governour was concern'd to releve Dio. (vvhen most streightned) with
Men and Ammunition, as will be immediately seen by
the History. He had (with an intention to go in Person
to raise the Siege at Dio) made march the whole
strength of India, and the success seem'd as it would
answer the design, for the Kings of India made him very
honourable Offers, and the Gentlemen and Souldiers
presented themselves without Pay or Reward.
         87. About that time, vvhich vvas the beginning of
Iuly,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7. Lib. 2. arriv'd at the Barr of Goa, the Ship, Holy Ghost,
Captain, Diogo Rebello, she had been of the Governours
Conserve, and by bad vveather had VVintred in Melinde,
and though she came vvith some of her men Sick, the
Air of the Land, the Governours care, and the excess
of joy for the business of Dio, made them in a little
time recover their health; Dom Iohn de Castro vvas
glad of so seasonable a Relief to encrease the Fleet;
yet came no News from the Fortress, vvhich the people
construed to be an Argument of some ill success; when
arriv'd the Letters sent by the Vicar,The news of the Vicar comes. by vvhich the
Governour understood, the straightness of the Siege,
the strength of the Enemy, and the vvant Ours vvere
in of Men and Provisions, and the time rather requiring
Execution then Counsel, he resolv'd vvith part of the
Fleet to send away his Son Dom Alvaro de Castro, against
the opinion of the Mariners, vvho in the beginning of
the VVinter counted the attempt too hazardous. Yet
Dom Iohn de Castro would not be Over-rul'd,He sends his Son Dom Alvaro with relief, by the
love of a Son, or the apprehensions of the Season, but
resolv'd upon sending Relief; vvhich being known by
the Souldiers, and Gentlemen, they came to offer themselves,
even those vvho by their Years and Command
vvere exempted; of their number vvas Dom Francisco
de Menezes, vvho, after having had great Commands,

offered as a common Souldier, to go vvith the Relief,
the Governour took him in his Arms desiring him to
stay to go on the Fleet vvith him, but seeing him resolute
to go in that Succour,and first of all Dom Francisco de Menezes with seven Ship. gave him seven Ships, vvith
them to try to make his passage; Dom Francisco put
vvith them to Sea, and vvith him vvere a great many
brave Souldiers, and some of his Kindred, vvho out of
love to Honour bore him Company.
         88. Three days after departed Dom Alvaro, reconcil'd
to his Father, upon his complaint,Dom Alvaro parts with Nineteen. that he had sent
before him, his Brother Dom Fernando, as if by Birthright
he claim'd the first dangers. There Embark't on
this Relief a great part of the Nobility, whom, the
pleasure of the design, and the company of the General,
made to undervalew the urks, and Storms. The
Governour gave his Son his blessing, and put him on
Board, with great tenderness from the people, for
offering up his Sons for his Country, toward vvhich,
then toward his own Blood, he shew'd himself a more
indulgent Father. The Governour having given his Son
some private Instructions, commanded him (though
by his General-ship otherwise dispens't) to obey Dom
Iohn Mascarenhas, and so writ him word; Dom Iohn de
Castro having always a true Value for other mens Merits.
The Ships of the Fleet were Nineteen, whose
Commanders were,The Commanders who went with him. Dom lorge de Menezes, Dom Duarte
de Menezes, Son to the Count of Feira, Luis de Mello de
Mendoca, and his Brother Iorge de Mendoca, Dom Antonio
de Attayde, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Lopo de Sousa,
Nuno Pereira de Lacerda, Athanasio de Freire, Pero de Attayde
de Inferno, Dom Iohn de Attayde, Bathasar de Sylva,
Dom Duarte Deca, Antonio de So, Belchior de Moniz,
Lopo Voz Coutinho, Francisco Tavarez, and Francisco
Guilherme.
         89. The Governour having dispatch't this Fleet,The Governours preparations. was
busie in preparing for that himself resolv'd to go upon,
laying out for Provisions and Money, which he took up
upon his Credit, the only Treasure he kept by him in

India, with which he Commanded the Hearts and Estates
of all men, as we shall prove by the visible Arguments
of example.
         90. The Ladies and Maids of Chaul,The Women of Chaul present their Jewels. possest by the
same generous Spirit, contributed all the Jewels and
Gold they wore, and with a Liberality above VVomen,
without either obligation, or asking, sent 'em
to the Governour, and with 'em word that they had
less tenderness then envy for their Children and Husbands
who went with him. We read not in the Annalls
of the Cesars, a braver Action of the Roman Ladies.
         91. When the present came, there was accidentally
in Goa a Lady of Chaul (by name Catherina de Sousa) who
putting all the Jewels she had in a little Box, with this
Letter sent 'em to the Governour. Sir, Knowing the
Women of Chaul have presented your Honour with
all their Jewels for the carrying on this Warr,The present and Letter of a Lady. though
I am now in Goa, I would not be without my share of
that honour, which belongs to me, as one of that
place. I send your Honour my Jewels by my Daughter
Katherine. Guess not by the smallness of their number,
how many may be in Chaul, for I assure you I am she
who have the fewest, having divided 'em amongst my
Daughters; and your Honour may believe, that the
Jewels of Chaul alone, without being Exhausted, are
sufficient for ten years to continue the Warr. The
favour I begg of your Honour is, presently to spend
mine in Don Alvaro's expedition, because I hope by
the intercession of our Lady he will get such signal
Victories as will excuse your Honour's Voyage and
Trouble: this I begg in my Prayers, and that our
Lady by Hers will so add to your Honour's Life, as
you may return into Portugall to the presence of
your Lady-wife and Daughters. Dated in Goa, at
my Daughter Donna Maria's House, this Eleventh of
Iuly. I would, (were there need of it) for your
Honour's Service, pawn my Daughter Katherine. I

know not, whether their love to their Country, or
their afection to the Governour produc't these extreams.
We have seen as much necessity for it, but not so
great Bravery as in Dom Iohn de Castro's time. Many
Gentlemen, after having been Generals, and now Old
men leaning upon Staffs, came and offer'd themselves
for Souldiers, there not being any one grown stiff by his
Years or Command.
         92. After both Reliefs were gone,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7. Lib. 2. the Governour
was uniting the strengths which remain'd, and disposing
the Government of the City in his absence. All the
Exigencies of the State found him ready with one hand
in Peace, the other in Warr. And the Fortress wanting
Ammunition, and Provision, (besides what was already
sent) he Laded a great Carvell, which being a heavy
Vessel would have much ado to endure the Sea. Some
Souldiers had refus'd to go upon her, counting it danger
without reputation to strive with the Elements.
The importance of the business made him desire to
entrust the Carvell with some Person of Quality, whose
honour would lessen the danger. He imparted the business
to Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, a Gentleman, for
his Courage and Judgment, very much indear'd to him;
who told him, Antonio Moniz Baretto had Gallantry and
Industry enough for greater things; that though, for
some sleight Quarrel against him as Governour, he
would not sue for, yet would he not deny the King's
Service in so great an urgency; that he would feel him,
and bring the answer of his Resolution. So it was, that
Antonio Moniz,Antonio Moniz accepts of a Voyage to Dio. understanding the Governours pleasure,
and that he put him on a Voyage whose difficulty only
made others refuse it, presently embrac't it. We will
in its proper place tell the success and danger he met
with.
         93. There was by the Vigilancy of the Governour
entred some Relief into the Fortress, by which the
Danger and Duty lay upon more Shoulders, yet were
they not in any proportion to the Enemy, because the

last Recruit which came to the Army, consisted of thirteen
thousand Foot,There come an other Iuzarcaon to continue the Siege. under the Conduct of an other
Iuzarcaon, in Valour not Inferiour, nor in Fortune ove
the first. He brought express Orders from the Sultan
to streighten the Siege, and Letters from him to Rumecaon,
that he could not stand by and see four contemptible
Fellows, from the Worlds end, affront the Kings
of Cambaya at home; that they should all Dye in the
design; that he had rather have a desolate then a subjected
Empire; that half the Portuguese being already
Buried in the ruins of the Fortress, if they could not
force 'em to yield as Men, they should as Lyons kill 'em
in their Dens. Rumecaon gave no other answer, then by
shewing (sometimes for his glory, sometimes for his
excuse) our Walls, and Works, every where thrown
down, being very much transported that the Sultan
was not satisfy'd with what he had done, and more provok't
with despair, then reward, he promis'd to satisfie
him by Death, or Victory; and being more obey'd for
his Cruelty then Command,The Enemy makes a Bastion. he ordered the making of
a Bastion before Saint Iames's work, which was with
incredible haste perform'd, and furnish't with Men and
Ordnance; and commanding our Works, our men
could not appear without being fech't off by the Enemies
Bullets.
         94. The Commander in Chief was not a little
troubled at it;Ou mer throw it down. for if Rumecaon should (as his design
was) Storm on that side, our Defendants would not
be able to resist him, without lying open to the Enemies
shot. Resolv'd therefore to throw down the Work,
he recommends the Execution of it to two Brothers,
Dom Pedro, and Dom Iohn de Almeyda, who Sallying out
about Mid-night with an hundred Souldiers, found the
Moors, some sleeping, others careless on confidence of
the place and hour. Charging them on a suddain, in a
little time they made a great Slaughter, for, forgetting
themselves they run upon our Lances and Swords, not
aware of Death or Enemy. Those who by flying could

provide for themselves, with Groans and Crys gave the
Allarum to the Camp, without being able to affirm any
thin for certain. In the same confusion came the news
to Rumecaon, who (as dangers by Night appear bigger)
concluded this Exploit of ours was grounded on some
great Recruit arriv'd by stealth, which escap'd his Sentinels.
He call'd the Officers to Counsel whilst the
Army betook themselves to their Arms, and resolv'd
with all his strength to relieve the Bastion. He wasted
the time of Action in Orders and Preparations, and
coming to the place found the Work on the ground, the
Guards kill'd, and our men Retir'd; an Action of no less
fortune then concernment. There Dy'd of the Enemy
three hundred, of our not one.
         95. Rumecaon presently ordered the raising thick
Walls of Earth against Saint Iohn's work, to be Guarded
by a Troop of Moors, who by turns took the Watch,
and on the top of 'em he planted some Canon to Batter
the VVork at a more convenient distance. Dom
Iohn Mascarenhas, Vigilant in preventing the designs of
the Enemy,The Courage of fourteen Souldiers. put out through a Skit-gate fourteen Souldiers,
in a stormy and dark Night, who charging on a
suddain the Moors, drove them from their Posts, whilst
the Labourers with Pick-axes and other Instruments
threw down the Work, which being told Rumecaon, he
resolv'd with open force to storm the Fortress, ordering
for the next day a general Assault, on which he made a
Speech to his Souldiers, encouraging 'em, by the affronts
they had receiv'd from so few Enemies, brought Low
by Duty, Hunger, and VVounds, that those who fell
there were more honourable then those who surviv'd,
to be to the VVorld an infamous testimony of an ignominious
VVarr; that it was in them, to save their King's
Honour, to revenge their Companions and to leave a
glorious Fame of themselves in the East; that they
ought to be confident of the Sultan's thanks, for he
would not fail to reward 'em, and take a particular account
of all their VVounds; that if any would venture

to govern the Generals staff, he promis'd as a private
Souldier to be the first should Scale the Wall.
         96. Thus he left 'em fir'd with glory and revenge.
Next morning by break of Day, at the Noise of warlick
Instruments, and with their Colours flying (the
Displaying of which was observ'd by ours) the Army
march't,A general assault. and coming to the Walls began to plant Scaling
Ladders round about the Fortress, with the advantage
of innumerable and different Shots, of Arrows, Bullets,
and other Arms, which came from the Body of the
Army. The horrour too of the Fight was increas'd by
confus'd and repeated Noises, which, Violently,
raising their Spirits and confounding their Judgments,
hindred both Command and Obedience. The Moors
boldly Scal'd the Walls, as did the Turks on the other
side, as if they envy'd each others danger, all strove to
be the first at hazards, and blows. Ours, though but
few (every one his own Commander, and encourager)
so behav'd themselves as if each single man had been
to answer for the reputation of all. The first who came
to the top with their Blood and Lives paid for their
daring, but were immediately with the same eagerness
seconded by others, some prick't forward by their own
Courage, others by the General, who from below as
he discovered in 'em, heat, or fear, prais'd or reproach'd
those who Scal'd.
         97. The Moors cast Granados, Pots of Powder, and
Balls of Wild-fire in such quantity into the Works, that
our men Fought in the Flames, which catching their
Cloaths burnt them alive. The Commander in chief
strove to avoid this danger with some Barils of water,How our men kept off the Fire.
which did partly extinguish or mitigate the heat of
the Fire; but the Enemy, knowing how much hurt it
did, us'd in all their assaults the same artifice, against
which ours found out a more easie then effectual remedy,
many Cloathing themselves with Leather, which
the Fire did not so soon seize upon, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
with Hangings he had of gilt Leather (the

Walls being naked) help't to Clothe many of the Souldiers.
         98. The Warr grew hot, and the Fortress (hid in
Clouds of smoak) was hardly seen, 'twas only discoverable
by a weak Light, the continual Flashing of
Shooting, what was seen, and what was heard was full
of horrour; there were at the Foot of the VVall innumerable
Bodies, some Dead, others Gasping, and all
that was before the sight, or judgment, was a foul
Spectacle, of Deaths, horrour, and wounds. 'Twas in
all the VVorks on both sides Fought with great Courage,
though with disproportion of Numbers 'twixt
the Besiegers and Besieg'd. The work Luis de Sousa
defended, (where was Dom Fernando de Castro) was
near lost, the assault taking it with the most Breaches,
and being attaqued by the Choise men of the Army:
Yet did the Defendants give glorious marks of their
Valour, Fighting with such Courage in the Flames, as
they shew'd themselves, besides Valiant, insensible. Dom
Fernando de Castro did here render himself singular by
Actions above his Years, proving Courage stays not for
Age. The Portuguese did that day things worthy a better
Pen, and larger History. The very Turks were testimony
of their Prowess, saying, the Franks only deserv'd
to wear Beards.
         99. During the assault the Work toward the Sea
shot often amongst the Enemy, who Fighting in Companies
were more exposed, and receiv'd no little loss,
which Rumecaon taking notice off,The Enemy retires, seeing his Colours
torn, and his best men Dead, and that without the loss
of a stone the Portuguese had maintain'd the Breaches
of their Fortress, commanded the sounding a Retreat,
less sensible of the loss, then shame. That day was at
several time happy to our Arms;With the Death of three hundred. for the Enemy losing
on the place three hundred, and carrying off two thousand
VVounded, there was missing none of ours, though
some lost much Blood. The Commander in chief immediately
look't after the VVounded; the tenderness

with which he us'd them being the chief remedy; By
helping the infirm, not only with Expence, but grief
and Fellow-feeling; he shew'd himself in Peace their
Father, in VVarr their Companion. Their danger was
presently succeeded by their Labours, for by Night
they all repair'd what the Batteries had thrown down
by Day, and all with such Chearfulness undertook the
Task, as if they came to rest themselves by carrying
Stones, Earth, and Fagots.
         100. Rumecaon seeing the hazard and difficulty of
taking the Fortress by Scaling,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 2. Lib. 8. commanded the filling
up of the Ditch from Saint Iohns to Saint Iames's
work, a thing he put the Ianizaries upon, who proud
of their Repute and Courage did ambitiously covet the
most eminent dangers of the Siege.Rum on goes about filling up the Ditch. There were Dead
already four hundred, leaving their name and grief for
'em great amongst the surviving, who carry'd on the
VVork, which prov'd to 'em of little advantage and
great danger; for our Guns took 'em off, and a great
many of the VVork-men; whose Bodies by a Cruel and
Barbarous discipline were thrown in to fill up the
Ditch, the VVork being of Fagots and Earth, went on,
Kneaded with the Blood of the poor men who Labour'd
in it. They planted some Pieces with which they
did harm to our works, chiefly Saint Thomas's, where
they took from us the use of a great Gun, and the Battery
look't dispos'd for greater Execution.
         101. About that time the Vicar Iohn Coelho, with
nine Souldiers in a little Boat arriv'd at the Fortress,The Vicar returns to Dio.
for though he found the Seas high, and the VVinds contrary,
pains and necessity over-came the danger; He
reported the Governour was with all diligence preparing
to come to raise the Siege; that he had already sent
great Recruits; that there were five hundred men in
Bacaim, who hop't with the first opportunity to cross
the Gulf; that many not brooking any delay had already
ventred to Sea. This news went about the Fortress,
and was by the Souldiers entertain'd with Dancing

and Musick; every one looking out to Sea took the
Clouds for Ships, so credulous are men upon any
glimpse of hopes. The Moors had the news of our Recruits,
and before our men should grow in Numbers
with the force they expected, a general assault was ordered,
and they resolv'd to enter the Fortress, or by their
Deaths, Blood, and Perishing, show the World and the
Sultan, the fault was not theirs.
         102. That day with three and twenty Canon,A fresh assault. and
some Basilisks they began to Batter, which they continued
till Sun setting, and the next day till three in the
afternoon. They threw down most of the Walls, so that
Ours could not by any Reparations or Traveses shelter
themselves from the continual discharging of the Enemies
Musqueteers. The Turks by the ruins of the
Battery got presently on Saint Thomas's VVork, yet did
the Captain Luis de Sousa, Dom Fernando de Castro, and
Dom Francisco de Almeyda, with other stout Souldiers
who kept it, receive them with such fury on their
Lances, as they forc't them back, some Dead, others
Maim'd. There presently follow'd fresh men, whom our
Swords made company for the former. The like fortune
had the Fight in the other VVorks, the Moors loss, and
our mens courage being the same. The Battery had so
raz'd our Fortress, that the Moors (as in a pitch't Field)
fought with Ours upon the same advantage of ground,
Levell'd by the ruins, but by their Numbers and Fireworks
did out-do us. Ours that day deserv'd immortal
memory for many hours enduring the weight of so unequal
a Fight; for those of the Enemies, who were
wearied or wounded, were relieved continually by fresh
men; the Portuguese being always the same shew'd no
difference of either Courage or Time.
         103. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas went about all the
Posts commanding,How our men keep off the Enemy. and Fighting, one while their Captain,
another their Companion, and seeing St. Thomas's
work in the greatest danger, being most charg'd by the
Enemy, sent for a great many Pots of Powder, by those

so honourable Matrons, who despising danger and labour,
came seasonably through Lances and Bullets, to
their help, with unheard of example, and with encouragements
to the Souldiers full of great judgment and
courage, whilst others animated them with Regallos and
sweet-meats as if they coveted or deserv'd equal fame
with them. We had the wind in our faces, which, raising
clouds of Dust from the loose ground the Enemy
stood upon, almost blinded our men, who only by that
accident run the hazard of being lost, yet Fighting with
their Eyes shut they received the Moors, more intent
upon offending the Enemy, then providing for themselves.
The Enemies fought desperately, Rumecaon every
moment minding them of their Kings and their own
honour.
         104. Iuzarcaon with the Souldiers he commanded,Iuzarcaon falls upon Saint Iohn's work.
with so great a resolution fell upon St. Iohn's work that
our men were in no little danger: for after throwing
down the first who came up, others with so much fury
got upon the Walls, that for many hours they maintain'd
the Fight equal, till wounded with our Swords, some
Dead, others faltring in their Courage, lost the place
and their Lives. Here was the resistance and danger
greatest, for upon our men, whose force was already
wearied and shaken, came other fresh Moors, yet, as if
they had kept their strength and courage for the greatest
pinch, they repuls't the last as the first.
         105. In Antonio Pecanha's Post the Fight was not less
stout or fortunate,The great loss of the Enemy. and without particularizing accidents,
we may by the success judge the fortune of the
Day: for the Enemy left sixteen hundred Dead, besides
the innumerable number of the VVounded: an
incredible thing of a few more then two hundred Souldiers,
as were ours: so we find it writ in the Relations
and Histories of that Siege, which being ours do with
a more wary Pen write their own praises. VVe came
off with the loss of three Souldiers, and thirty Wounded.
         
            
106. The Fortress by the Battery which preceded
this assault was every where Ruin'd and Open, and we
to repair it wanted Time, Materials, and Men; yet did
Ours steal the hours of their rest, working by Night,
and throwing down the Houses of the Fortress, made
use of their Stones and Timber, making a kind of suddain
and stoln Defence, more becoming the time then
the necessity.
         107. Ammunition and Provision was wanting,The strengths of the Fortress. there
was no more Powder then what was every day made,
a little, and ill Dry'd, a want which the Moors began
to know, and had thereby the hearts to continue
the Siege, they had likewise advice that the scarceness
of other necessaries was answerable, for Wheat
was at three Crusades an Alquiere,About one third of a Bushel. and yet the want of
it greater then the price; the Sick instead of Hens eat
Crows, which coming to feed on the Dead bodies, the
Souldiers kill'd, and at an exorbitant rate Sold, the
Famine came at last to that height, as they spar'd not
Doggs, Cats, and other such Food, unwholsome and
unclean. Yet did they with such miserable Dyet recover
their strength, undervaluing dangers, and duty, by
the greatness of their minds over-coming the passions
and affections of Nature.
         108. Pans for Powder (which the Militia of India
use by Sea and Land,How the want of Pots of Powder was supply'd. and in this Siege were of no little
Execution) were as well as other offensive VVeapons
wanting, which was supply'd by putting together two
Gutter-tiles, the Concave inward, and Pitch't without,
at which hung lighted match, and being thrown
amongst the Enemy, divers were burnt by 'em: by this
easie invention did ours hasten the Victory.
         109. The Commander in chief desir'd to get some
intelligence concerning the practices of the Enemy, who
slye, and designing, did yet with strange reserv'dness
keep from us his designs. Besides it was advis'd from the
Fort next the Sea, that most Nights some Moors came
as farr as the Bridge of the Fortress, where they stop't,

as men who for some end came to survey, and be acquainted
with the situation; their silence, the time of
Night, and the continuance of it, evinc't their diligence
not to be casual. Upon which, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
perswaded Martim Botelho (a Souldiers of trust)
with ten Camerades to go one Night upon the Bridge,
and endeavour by Force or Craft to bring off one of
those Moors??? Martim Botelho, with the others about
Mid-night went out at the Skit-gates of the Courtain,
carrying only Swords and Bucklers, and being arriv'd at
the set place, (not to be discovered by the Moors) they
lay vvith their Faces on the ground, and listning a while,
heard some coming toward the Bridge, rising, they suddainly
set upon the Moors, vvho vvere eighteen, and
seeing themselves so unawares attaqu'd, did at the first
Onset turn their backs,Nob a Town in Palestine. leaving only on the place a
Nobite, vvho vvith a Lance stoutly defended himself.
Martim Botelho seeing it greater concernment to take,
then to Kill him,Our men get intelligence, put by vvith his Sword a thrust of his
Lance, and closing vvith him brought him fast in his
Arms to the Fortress, vvhere his Reception vvas vvith
that honour the Action merited.
         110. The Commander by the Prisoner knew the
Enemies intentions,what News of the Enemy. and made use of the advice to
prevent some Stratagems the Turks vvere contriving,
besides he told him there were missing in the Army
five thousand men cut off by us, not to name Officers
of note; that the Souldiers of the greatest Authority
despair'd of the design, hearing vve should as soon as the
Sea vvas down be Reliev'd; but that Rumecaon vvas by
the losses he had sustain'd more obstinate in carrying on
the Siege, as one engag'd by his honour, and by his promise
given to the Sultan; that by the advice of a Turkish
Engineer of Dalmatia, he had commanded the
undermining Saint Thomas's work,Saint Thomas's work mined. (vvhere vvas Dom
Fernando, with Diogo de Reynoso, and other Commanders
and Cavalliers) vvhich vvas done in so great silence
as our men could not make out the design, because

perhaps they believ'd that Fire-works vvere not as much
us'd in Asia,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 9. Lib. 2. as Europe; but the Chief Officers of the
Army being Turks, they brought as well Discipline as
Courage.
         111. Whilst they vvere vvorking in the Mine, Rumecaon
commanded 'em to seem to sap divers places
of the Wall, that vve being intent upon the common
danger, might not guess at the secret one. And by an
other Plot to divert our attention, he ordered the
making some wooden Horses to be plac't before Saint
Thomas's work, as if by them he intended to take it by
Scaling, and resolving to fall on the tenth of August,
on the Ninth he commanded the drawing off some
Guns vvhich he had Planted. And that vve might not
by vvondring at that find him out, He endeavour'd by
an other design to make us more secure.Rumecaon endeavours to keep it from us. He that night
sent an Absessine subtilly instructed to the Fortress, who
coming to the Wall, counterfeiting a Panick fear, cry'd
to the VVatch to take him in, that he might discourse
things of great concernment with the Commander;
being let in, and listned to by Dom Iohn Mascarenhas,
he discreetly began his Speech, cursing the desperateness
of his condition, that being Born of Christian Parents,
he had like an abortive fruit of Catholick Plants
abjur'd the Faith of his Fathers in vvhich he vvas bred;
that now vvith his Eyes opened he came to Knock at
the Door of the Church, that the Latin Priests might
bring back to the Sheep-fold of Christ, so lost a Sheep;
that this vvas the miserable relation of an uncompos'd
Life; that about the affairs of Cambaya, he could
assure him the Sultan had news that the Mogull vvith a
great Army vvas entred the Confines of his Kingdome,
putting all to the Sword; that Iuzarcaon, who had lately
brought thirteen thousand Foot to the Camp, had
orders to joyn vvith Rumecaon, and both together go
against the Enemy; that vvith the resolution he
commanded the drawing off the Canon, but that he
should be provided the next day to look for a general

assault, because the Turks would not without some
Noise end that Warr. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas commended
and confirm'd his resolutions of turning Catholick,
besides the taking kindly his intelligence, and
again let him down the Wall, to acquaint him with any
new thing that hapned in the Camp.
         112. The news of raising the Siege, with the certainty
of the assault which was to be given, was Nois'd about
the Fortress, and the Souldiers for joy put on that day
their Bravery, some rejoycing at the approach of the
Enemy, others at the end of the Warr. The Commander
in chief found a great forwardness in all the Souldiers
to expect the assault, for all thinking 'twould be
the last of so long a Siege, every one coveted to give
the latest memory of his Actions.
         113. Dom Fernando de Castro kept his Bed of a Feaver,
and hearing of the intended assault,Dom Fernando came sick upon the Works. rose, his Gallantry
offering violence to Nature; Dom Iohn Mascarenhas,
sometimes as his Commander, others as his Friend
went about to hinder it; but Disobedience here passing
for Virtue, he rather offended against Health then
against Honour, putting on his Armour and coming to
the Works.
         114. The day of the glorious Saint Laurence broke,
Dedicated by his happy Martyrdome to Fiery trials.
The Gentlemen with so much transport of joy came
to their Posts as if already in possession of Reward
and Victory. They presently saw at a distance the
Enemies Army marching Orderly, and dispersing it
self round about the Fortress.The Enemy makes shew of an other assault. Our Canon plaid
with no little Execution, the Enemy, Souldier like,
enduring the Charge, rather then discompose the
Order he march't in, till he had gain'd his Post, and
planted Ladders to begin the assault; they fell on
the Works with great resolution, hoping by Fighting
to amuse us, that the confusion of the Conflict might
cover the Stratagem of the Fire they had laid. Our
men shew'd great Bravery, as if in haste to rest

themselves in Victory, promis'd in the issue of that
Day.
         115. The fury of the Sword, without any fear of
that of the Fire, was kept off, in Saint Iohn's Work;
the Enemy fought carelesly, till the sign of springing
the Mine arriving 'em they all at the same time retir'd;
the same fear, equal and suddain in 'em all, discovered
us the Plot. The Commander in chief cry'd out immediately
for 'em to leave the Work; that the Mine,
now known by the suddain retiring of the Enemy,
might without any hurt take Fire. Every one by leaving
his Post obey'd their Commander, only Diogo de Reynoso
with disorderly Courage kept the place, calling
them Cowards who quitted it. At those words all return'd
to their Posts, rather following example then
reason.The Min takes Fire. The Mine immediately with a most hideous
report took Fire, and those stout Defendants lay Dead
in that place, they had kept alive.
               
                  Fernando hum delles, (ramo d' alta pranta
                  Onde o violento fogo com ruido
                  Em pedacos a muro no ar levanta)
                  Sera aly arrebat ado, & ao Ceo subido.
               
               
                  Fernand (this lofty Cedars highest bough
                  Where with a hideous crack a close Mine sprung,
                  Th' unrooted Wall into the Air will blow)
                  Shall in a sheet of Fire to Heaven be flung.
               
               Camoens Can. 10. St. 70.
             Here Dy'd Dom
Fernando de Castro at the age of Nineteen, rais'd from a
sickness Nature might have past over, but Courage
made it mortal. Dom Francisco de Almeyda lost his Life,
keeping up the courage and misfortune of his Family.
Here lay Buried Gil Coutinho, Ruy de Sousa, and Diogo
de Reynoso, who with his Life paid for so many Deaths,
he so generously, but fatally was instrumental to.
Dom Diogo de Sottomajor, flying with a Lance in his
hand, fell upon his Feet in the Fortress, without any
hurt by the Fire, or his fall; some lighted in the Enemies
Camp, about sixty men were lost by this mischance;
thirteen who came off which their Lives, were

wounded or deform'd by the Fire. Others more largely
write the accidents of this Fire. We had rather, then
grieve the attention of those who read the History, amongst
the chances of this so famous Siege, silently pass
over this unfortunate Day. Our men wondered to see
the Execution of smothered Powder should be so great,
that the stones of the Fortress blown up by the violence
of the blow should Kill a great many in the
Enemies Camp, the Fire rather following the impulse
of Nature then the prescrib'd Limits of the Engineer.
         116. After some time, when the Fortress was clear'd
from smoak, Rumecoan commanded five hundred Turks
to enter at the ruins of the fir'd Work, the rest of the
Camp in whole Companies seconding 'em.The memorable Courage of five Souldiers. Yet met
they with five stout Souldiers who resisted 'em, for a
good while sustaining the weight of so strange a Combate;
so unheard of a truth, as there goes as much
Courage to the Writing, as Action, though qualify'd by
the confession of our Enemies themselves, and by the
reverence of so many Years.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
with fifteen more came to that quarter to their Relief,
where he beheld two Spectacles, one challenging Compassion,
the other Amasement, and relieving the five,
all together made so stubborn a Resistance, as to stop
the fury of a Victorius Army; such a thing as, related
only with the bare truth, out-does all the Greeks or Romans
have in their Histories or Fables.
         117. 'Twas given out in the Fortress that the Turks
were Masters of the fir'd Work, upon which, some
Souldiers who fought in the other Posts came thither,
as where the danger was greatest. The false report happily
sav'd the Fortress, for they made a Body capable of
resisting thirteen thousand Foot, so many (as our
Histories reckon) were they, who went on upon the
Min'd work.The Courage of Isabel Fernandez and other Women. The Women, taught not to value their
Lives, brought Lances, Bullets, and Pots of Powder,
and the Magnanimous Isabel Fernandez, with only a Bill

in her hand, did by her Actions animate the Souldiers,
though much more by her example and words, crying
aloud, Fight for your God, Fight for your King, Cavalliers
of Christ, for he is on your side. The Enemies,
by the success of the Mine, having so fair a Door open
to Victory, resolv'd that day to conclude the business,
encourag'd by their General, and the opportunity, now
Fighting as own'd by fortune. Those who were on the
Work, (out of ambition to be the first in so eminent
an Action) behav'd themselves the more resolutely,
and being Ianizaries and Turks, would have for themselves
only the honour of the Day. Rumecaon commanded
the re-inforcing the assault in other places, that
against so inconsiderable a strength, diversion might facilitate
the Entry.
         118. The Fortress was often lost, the Enemy being
numerous and fresh, Ours, besides their being but few,
spent with the labour of so unequal resistance. The
Vicar Iohn Coelho,The Vicar encourageth the Souldiers. holding up a Crucifix, came to encourage
'em, saying, that God whose cause they maintain'd
was the giver of Victories, at which sight those
Loyal, and stout Champions, put in Breath again,
seem'd more then men in their Courage, for not one had
any weakness or sence for his Wounds, continuing the
Fight with the same vigour, and boldness, as they begun
it.
         119. Now was the Day declining, and the Turks
closely mingled with Ours, now mortally Burnt, out of
the same Wounds each man pour'd his own, and an
others Blood; and by a whole Armies charging on so
few Defendants, our Souldiers receiv'd many thrusts in
the same place. What we relate with truth, may seem
heightned. The great things the Portuguese did that
day let the whole East speak, I believe, every Stone of
famous Dio will be for 'em a silent Epitaph; Our Pen
shall not be ungratefully silent of the Names of those
five Cavalliers we spoke of,The names of the five Souldiers. who were, Sebastian de Sa,
Antonio Pecanha, Bento Barbosa, Bertholomew Correa, and

Mestre Iohn a Chirurgion. With the Fight ended the day.
Rumecaon commanded the sounding a Retreat, after
losing seven hundred men in the assault, the Wounded
were without number, of whom very many Dy'd (for
want of looking to) in their Cure; the multitude
tyring out the Chirurgions and making scarce the remedies.
Mestre Iohn only Dy'd of those five Cavalliers
who kept the VVork, torn in pieces by his many
Wounds, which he sufficiently Reveng'd, unwilling to
leave the Fight, or obey his Friends, who would have
forc't him to retire, as one so considerable for his Profession,
not less for his Courage.The peculiar Courage of Isabel Madeira. His Wife Isabel Madeira
came to bind up his Wounds, and after Burying
him with her own hands, with few tears, and great grief,
went with the other Matrons to work in the renches;Ib.
so great a Courage, as hath been but seldome seen in the
most resolute.
         120. Upon the Enemy's retiring, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
gave order for the Burying the Dead, which were
in the ruins of the Work, removing them from one
Grave to an other; for the straightness of time and place
they were Buried all together, so honourable Ashes
being without Funeral honours, and Officious tears;
yet rest they, in so poor a Grave, more mist by their
Country, then those who in Alablaster urns have left
of inglorious Lives an idle Memory. Dom Fernando
de Castro was laid in a Depository by himself, that if
the Governour his Father would carry his Bones to any
other place, he might make him a more Stately, but not
more glorious Monument. After the Commander in
Chief had with pious Earth covered his Companions,
he fell upon repairing the Breaches the assault had left
in the Walls, help't in it by the VVomen, who had their
share of labour and danger, not reserving time and
place for the grief and tears of their Sons and Husbands,
whom they had seen expiring before their Eyes, and had
themselves Buried, by unheard of examples smothering
the inclinations of Nature.

            
            
            
         
         
            
121. After repairing the works with Stones, yet
warm with Blood and Fire,The Commanders resolution. the Commander in Chief
call'd to Councel those few Companions who had surviv'd
the Storming, representing to them the compassionate
condition they were in; the greatest part of the
Defendants being Dead; those who remain'd, Sick or
VVounded; the Arms all in pieces; the Provision stinking;
the Ammunition consum'd; the Fortress thrown
down; the Seas, by reason of the VVinter, more innavigable;
the Enemy vigilant, and hourly Recruited, besides
his knowledge of all these wants; all which considered,
he begg'd of 'em, that, without any regard
had to their own Lives, they would consult with him,
how best to Salve their Kings, and their own Honour;
that they would bethink themselves, how the VVorld
stood looking on, and that the whole East had their
Eyes upon 'em, as being in a condition to deserve the
greatest Fame, or Infamy; that if 'twere not in their
power to get the Victory, 'twas in it to deprive their
Enemies of it, every one having the power of Dying
bravely; that they would purchase greater honour, cut
in pieces, then the Moors if Victorious; that he had
call'd them together to impart to 'em his Resolution,
hoping every one would approve it, which was, that,
wasting that little Provision and Ammunition they
had, burning what ere might be Pillage, breaking their
Guns, with Swords in their hands they should Sally
forth to find the Enemy,Ib. then could not that be call'd
a Victory, where neither Plunder or Prisoners were to
be had. There was not a Souldier, who, having heard
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, thought it not long till so generous
a resolution was effected. Let Rome say, if in her
Annalls she finds Recorded so great an Action of her
Fabios, Scipios, or Marcellus's.
         
            
122. Whilst this was in debate,
               
                  Alvaro quando o inverno o mundo espanta
                  E tem o caminho humido impedido
                  Abrindoo vence as ondas, & os perigos
                  Os ventos, & depois, os inimigos.
               
               Camo. Can. 10. St. 70
               
                  Alvar, when Winter swathes the Earth in Snow,
                  And hath on humid Gates cold Padlocks hung,
                  These burst, through dangers to seek dangers goes,
                  And fights the Elements to fight the Foes.
               
               Sir R. F. Translation.
             Dom Alvaro de
Castro was strugling with the storms of Winter,Dom Alvaro de Castro's Voyage. for, it
being then the four and twentieth of Iune, a Season
when those Seas are not Navigable, He, sollicitous for
the danger the Fortress was in, not valuing that of his
Fleet, did by force of Oars sail even under the Waves;
The Whirl-winds were so Tempestuous, and the Seas so
High and Counter as they swallow'd up the Ships;
some with the force of the Weather broke, others losing
their Masts and Tackling, lay without Steerage at
the mercy of the Sea, Shipping in water on both sides,
without any Government of their Helm. Dom Alvaro,
resolute in the relief of Dio, turn'd too and again,
finding himself every moment so under water, as with
the Ships rowling the Sea beat off her Rudder; yet by
his impatience, with some Ships of his Convoy got
shattered and torn into Bacaim, the rest recover'd different
Ports,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. and Bays. Here Dom Alvaro found Dom
Francisco de Menezes forc't back again with the same
VVeather, after several times venturing into the Gulf,
which he found so High and Stormy, as for saving the
Bottom he was forc't to cast Over-board all his Lading
of Ammunition and Provision.
         123. Antonio Moniz Barretto at that time came
in with his great Carvel of Provisions,Antonio Moniz arrives at Bacaim. which (so
general was the Storm) had been oft times lost, and
on his arrival deliver'd her up to Dom Alvaro, with a
resolution in a little Vessel he found, in despight of the
Seas to go for Dio, so season'd with one danger, as to

venture on an other. The storm that day encreasing,
the Ship began to drive, and spent two Cabells; the
Vessel being of such consequence, as having in her all
sort of Provision for relieving the place, Dom Alvaro
endeavoured to help her, but do the Mariners what
they could, so great was the Storm they could not get
to her, yet did Antonio Moniz Barretto put himself in a
little Boat he by chance found on Shore, and, though
those from the Land saw him a thousand times under
water, the Vessel being light, and yielding to the Seas,
Liv'd in 'em; at last he arriv'd, made fast a Cabell to
the Carvel,Saves the Ship of Provisions. and against every ones judgment, with
more fortune then reason, tow'd her after him, and concluding
that only such a Vessel, little and light, could
make her way through so great Seas,Ib. on which the
beating and shock of the VVaves would make a less impression,
he privately bought it of a Merchant, and with
some Mariners whom he paid what they ask't, embark't
on her. There was casually standing on the shore Garcia
Rodriguez de Tavora, who seeing Antonio Moniz resolution,
desir'd him, to take him with him, Moniz excus'd
it, saying, 'twas not convenient he should have so eminent
a Person for his Companion,Two Gentlemen go for Dio. who would ecclipse
him: that only for himself he would have that danger,
without any other going in his Boat. Garcia Rodriguez
assur'd him he would every where confess, 'twas he who
carry'd him, and give it him under his hand; so scrupulously
in those times did they manage points of honour.
Antonio Moniz, satisfy'd with that modesty, permitted
Garcia Rodriguez to come on Board. Miguel de
Arnide, a Souldier of a Gigantick body, and not less in
Gallantry then Stature, seeing them put out to Sea,
cry'd to 'em from the shore, What Gentlemen do you
go without me to Dio?Ib. here's no room for you, answer'd
one of them, but the stout Souldier, with his
Cloaths on, Leaping into the Sea with a Musquet in his
mouth, swom toward the Boat, and Antonio Moniz seeing
so great Bravery staid to take him in, saying in one

so good a Companion he carry'd a good Recruit to
Dio.
         124.The dangers of the Voyage. Those Gentlemen were at Sea in so bad VVeather,
as all that day and night they Sail'd at the mercy
of the VVinds, the Boat, with her Helm lach't, and
keeping no course, obeying the Seas; the VVaves sometimes
drove 'em on shore, at others made them lose
what they had got, they were with a Bonnet brought
to their main Yard, turning up and down as the Seas
carry'd 'em, which fill'd them so full of water, as very
hardly did they free her with Bucquets; in that perplexity
and danger past they the Night, all worn out
with their continual Labour, by the darkness of the
Night and closeness of the VVeather not knowing
where they were; The day broke, but with little difference
from the Night, and they were still striving with
the VVaves, till about Evening they came in sight of
the Fortress, so Battered, as, for the ruins, they hardly
made it; they came at last to an Anchor, without the
Sentinels taking notice of it,They arrive at Dio. on which they conjectur'd
the Fortress was lost; Antonio Moniz call'd so loud to
'em, as being heard by those within, they went with the
news to the Commander in Chief; here 'tis said, that
the Sentinell asking who's there, a Souldier answered,
Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora,The generous jealousie of two Gentlemen. which Antonio Moniz taking
ill, reply'd, that he was the man came thither,
and, if Garcia Rodriguez had not civilly and modestly
tempered Antonio Monits just resentment, the Jealousie,
(though time and reason were above so slight Quarrels)
might have caus'd a greater Breach. Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas came to receive 'em, and with embraces told
'em, how much he valued their so seasonable Relief;
he ask't Antonio Moniz where Dom Alvaro de Castro was,
who in the Souldiers hearing answered him aloud, Sir
you have him here with sixty Sail in Madrefabat,They tell news of Dom Alvaro. and
with the first fair weather you'l see his Streamers; but
between themselves he told him, that, after often putting
to Sea, being forc't back again, he was yet at Bacaim,

but so impatient of his stay there, that he would
not wait for the time of year to come to his Relief;
this news was so entertain'd, that the Souldiers with
Dancing and Capering forgot their past Sufferings, in
their hopes of the Recruit at hand; and those who had
serv'd under Dom Alvaro, upon their experience of his
Gallantry, warranted his coming, in spight of the Seas
and VVinds.
         125. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas entertain'd his Guests
on Saint Iohns and Saint Thomas's works, where were
the most ruins, Courting them, who had so well deserv'd
from greater dangers, with those pastimes of
VVarr. Our danger was not at that time less, though
less apprehended. Antonio Monits sent back the Vessel
he came in to his Cousin-german Luis de Mello de Mendoca,
who had begg'd it of him; there went on her
some maim'd Souldiers, with Letters for Dom Alvaro de
Castro from the Commander in chief, in which he gave
him an account of all had past,The Commander in chief adviseth Dom Alvaro, telling him in short the
straights we have before related. The Boat came back
to Bacaim to the great joy of those who saw her, to
hear the Fortress yet held out for the King, though
that was allay'd with the dreggs of so many being Kill'd,
of whom the most resented was Dom Fernando de Castro,
who left behind him in so green Years so ripe a Memory.
Dom Alvaro receiv'd it with the constancy of a
Souldier, comforting himself with having his Sword in
his hand to revenge him: and immediately that Evening
commanded the Fleet to put to Sea, with orders
to go away directly for Dio,who puts forth from Dio. and that no Ship should
look after an other.
         126. Rumecaon in the interim, seeing greater Execution
done by Mines then Assaults,Rumecaon goes on with the Mines. and having heard,
by some Slaves who fled from the Fortress, of our Famine
and Danger; of the grief ours were in for the
miss of so many eminent Persons who were lost in the
Mine, and of the scarcity of Ammunition and Provision,
resolv'd to continue Mining, which was done with

less Danger, and more Execution, and in pursuance of
the design, commanded them to Sap at Saint Iames's
work, and that part of the Wall which runs about it.
All was done by crooked and cover'd Galleries, to hide
the design from us, and secure the Work-men. Dom
Iohn Mascarenhas, cautious, and fore-warn'd, arguing
from the short truce of the Enemy, that he was working
in some other new Mine, affraid too of Antonio Pecanha's
work, gave order for the Repairing it, and the
opening some place to Listen at, by which he found
they were working at that part of the Wall,Our men labour to prevent 'em. which the
Enemy found so strong, as to be proof against his
Tools; an extremity he with Fire and Vinegar overcame.
A proof the Enemies we had to do with in Asia,
wanted neither Courage or Discipline, as some falsely
write, who to lessen our Victories, take the Eastern
Moors to be Raw and Barbarous; that day they begun to
destroy the Wall, and presently Rumecaon commanded,
that 'twixt Saint Thomas's Work and the round Tower
the Mine should be made, which our men knowing,
Counter-mind, and made up a strong Wall within; and
wanting Materials, and VVork-men, those honourable
Matrons help't in so difficult a Work, to favour the
wounded and sick, who could neither endure nor excuse
the Labour.
         127. Rumecaon having perfected the Mine, resolv'd
under protection of that, to make a general Assault, and
calling to him the Officers of the Army, and those who
were chose to Scale the VVall, 'tis reported he made
'em this Speech. Those ruins you see, besmear'd
with the Blood of our Fellow-Souldiers,Rumecaon encourageth his men for an other assault. must this
day be our Grave, or our Quarters; they who keep
those shattered VValls are an hundred men, whose
strength is by hunger and wounds so abated, as we
only Fight with the shadows of those who have been
men, who miserably Sacrifice to our Semitars Lives
without Blood. All that honour, they with unhappy
Courage have won in this Siege, is to be Ours; for,

from the end of a Warr are the Atchievements nam'd,
and the World gives always the Courage to the last
success; Let's make an end of winning the Fortress,
Let's climb that mount of Triumphs, we shall with
only one Victory revenge infinite Affronts; Let's
deliver this Slave Asia from Prisons, and Taxes, Let's
free our Seas, which groan under the weight of their
Fleets; we shall by this Assault make an end of so
glorious a design, and the East will for whole Ages
joyfully remember so glorious a Day.
         
         128. Having ended his Speech, he spoke to, and animated
particular Persons,They fall upon Saint Iames's work. with motives seasonable to
the Time, and Persons, designing rewards to those who
should first Scale the Walls, as would have done the
most prudent and experienc't Commander of Europe.
On the same day, the sixteenth of August, the Enemy
with all their strength march't out of their Quarters,
and dividing themselves orderly about the Works, left
the main Body of the Army to fall upon Saint Iames's,
where they hop't to open the Gate for Victory. Here
they gathered Tumultuously, with rude Crys in their
mouths, and letting fly, in great abundance, Arrows,
and Darts, to summon our greatest strength to the Defence;
here the Fight was at the hottest, till in the
height of it, the Enemy, seeming to yield to our resistance,
as on a sign given, suddainly retir'd; Our men
who had been fore-warn'd, knowing the cheat of their
feign'd fear in which they went off, quitted too the
Work, looking for the springing of the Mine, which
the Moors made play, and being resisted by the Counterforts
and Scarp of the Wall,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. which met with it, it
sprung Recoyling towards the outward face of the
Wall, and the Curtain flying, carry'd it with so great
violence upon the Moors, that above three hundred
were Kill'd, and many more Maim'd.
         129. The Fortress was for some time hid in the
Clouds of Powder, and Smoak, so as neither side knew
their loss; as soon as the Air grew thinner, the Enemy

came on in Troops to get upon the spoils and ruins of
the Fire, with so much confidence of Victory as they
hindred one the other, droven on out of Covetousness
of reward, or Ambition of honour; yet did Ours receive
them on their Lances, sending 'em back VVounded
to those whom the Mine had destroy'd; after them
came on others, also after a long dispute repell'd
by ours, who were Gall'd with the multitude of Arrows,
Darts, and Balls of VVild-fire which came from
the Camp, with which they spoilt some of our men,
and hindred the Souldiers, attent on both dangers, from
the Defence; yet so Burnt and VVounded, not one
quitted the place he kept, where they so Heroically behav'd
themselves, as is witness'd by the success and inequality
of the Fight. The fire, the Moors cast into the
Works, was so great, as Ours fought in live Flames,
which the Commander in Chief remedy'd, by bringing
Barrels of water, which mitigated, or put out, the
fir'd Cloaths, and Bodies. The Enemies greatest force
being drawn hither, here it was our men made the greatest
opposition, which made the Fight the more terrible,
Recruited every moment by the Moors with fresh
men, and Re-inforc't with the presence and voice of the
General.
         130. Antonio Monits Barretto, and Garcia Rodriguez
de Tavora gave here eminent proofs of their Courage,Ib.
enduring, with more then ordinary constancy, the
weight of the Enemies, shewing, in the extremities both
by Land and Sea, the same Gallantry. A great share
of the honour of the day is due to those, never enough
prais'd Matrons, companions not only in their labour,The women continue their Courage.
but danger. The good Old woman Isabel Fernandez,
with a Bill in her hands, by her words, but more by her
example animated the Souldiers; and the others, amongst
the Arrows, Lances, and Bullets, either show'd
their own Courage, or assisted it in others.
         131. In the other works, they were not idle; for to
facilitate, by the diversion, the entrance at Saint Iames's,

where the Mine sprung, there was Fighting in all. Rumecaon
gave order to Batter the Church in the Fortress,
which, by being high, might be thrown down, believing
too the offence in that place would be more sensible;
but ours had so receiv'd the Enemy, as they now coldly
and remissly went to Scale the Wall, kept back by the
horrour of our Execution amongst 'em.
         132. Rumecaon out of impatience Commanded the
founding a Retreat,The Enemy retires with loss. leaving above five hundred Dead,
without number the Wounded. Any one of ours
might content himself with the honour he that day
gain'd. That stout Souldier Miguel de Arnide so signalis'd
himself, as he prov'd even that Body too little
for so great a Soul, and accompanying so vast a Growth
with proportionable Strength, who ere was reach't by
his first blow, excus'd him from a second. Mojatecaon,
vvho vvas come to the Army vvith a great Recruit, and
spoke vvith scorn of the valour of the Portuguese,Mojatecaon praiseth our mens Valour. by
the experience of that day forming an other judgment,
said they vvere vvorthy to command Kingdoms, and
that the VVorlds good fortune consisted in their being
so small in number; for Nature had, like Lyons, made
them few, Locking them up in the Denns of the
West.
         133. VVe lost that day seven Souldiers, those vvho
vvere Scorch't vvere twenty two; and now the vvell
vvere so few, as not to be enough to help the Wounded,
less able to repair the ruins of the Fortress, for vvhich,
time, Materials and Men vvere vvanting; but Rumecaon
finding so tough resistance in the Assaults, had an
other opinion of our strength. At this time three of
our Slaves ran to the Enemy,Rumecaon hath intelligence from three of our Slaves who ran away. vvho brought before Rumecaon,
told him, there vvere not threescore Souldiers
in the Fortress, vvho could bear Arms, and those very
much vvore out vvith Hunger, and continual duty of
Labour, and Centries; in vvhom nothing vvas to be
found but obstinacy vvithout force. Rumecaon, on the
certainty of this news, resolv'd the next day vvith all

his strength to storm us, acquainted his men with the
condition we were in, and gave order they should all
hear it from the Slaves mouths,Ib. who running up and
down the Army merrily spread the relation of our necessities.
         134. As soon as the Day broke, the Army had orders
to give the Assault;He gives an other assault. at which, as at the last of the
Warr, every one would be present, some put on their
Bravery, believing they went rather to Triumph then
to Fight. They came out of their Tents with their
Colours flying, playing on diverse Instruments, which
seconded by the noise of the Camp, form'd Barbarous,
and hideous Ecchoes, and having, by the intelligence
we have spoke of, o'recome their fear, as soon as they
came in sight they advanc't to Saint Thomas's work,
which being almost all thrown down help't them up by
its ruins. The first company who fell on, with confidence
of Victory, were Turks, who, by our mens casting
amongst them some Pots of Powder,Our mens stout resistance. were forc't
being all on Fire to retreat. Others came on with the
same fury, and after a long dispute, as the first, gave
back, of whom our Swords had drawn Blood; but
Rumecaon not doubting but so continual resistance
would spend us, as Iron which is blunted by cutting, by
the slaughter of his own men guessing at our weakness,
Commanded his Souldiers to go take possession of the
Fortress, which had now none left to oppose 'em. Here
tumultuously fell on a great Body of the Moors, engag'd
on by their own credulity or the words of the
General. These at their first speed got upon the Wall,
and began body to body to Fight with ours, many and
fresh, against a few, already wearied and wounded; yet
deriving Courage from their gallantry; and necessity,
the last found them as Valiant as the first. Some of the
Enemies falling down, others came in their places, which
often lost the Fortress. Here fell in Dom Iohn Mascarenhas,
animating, as a great Commander, his Men, and
Fighting, as the stoutest Souldier, himself; and provided

for all the chances of Warr, had ready all sorts of
Arms; which our men made use of, being by those stout
Women, put into their hands. Luis de Sousa Commander
of that Work, shew'd that day great Gallantry.
Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom
Pedro, and Dom Francisco de Almeyda, did things worthy
a larger History,Ib. and all the Cavalliers, and Souldiers,
who were in the Action, purchast a most deserv'd
Name.
         135. Rumecaon by the Slaves information, believing
he should find free entrance,Rumecaon falls upon Saint Iohns work and retires. Commanded his men to
fall upon Saint Iohns work; but those few Defendants
there were, so behav'd themselves, as the Enemy was
forc't vvith loss and shame to retire. Rumecaon, amaz'd
at vvhat he saw, said, vve vvere the Instruments of Heavens
anger against Cambaya, and the second time, with
certain Barbarous and Ridiculous expiations, vvent about
the appeasing Mahomet; and because in storming,
he lost a great many men without success, and the Souldiers
now grown Cowardly, did on the apprehension
of their being so daily Butcher'd, slight their obedience,
he set upon Mining again, as a vvay more effectual or
more secure; and first he commanded the opening some
Loop-holes in the VVall, which divided the Army, and
our Fortress, by vvhich our men receiv'd no little harm,
Fighting as in a plain Field, vvithout the protection of
the VVall, vvhich vvas thrown down; and the showring
of Musquets vvithout any intermission annoy'd us.
         136. He commanded his Souldiers to Batter the Cistern
vvith a great Gun,He endeavours to break down the Cistern. because that being broke, as
in a necessity past Cure, thirst vvould destroy us; this
Cistern is at the entry of a Street, vvhich vve call the
Cova, and vvas the Moors old Ditch, vvhere those vvho
vvere not fit for Service retir'd; here fell store of Bullets,
not vvithout doing mischief to the poor people
vvho fled thither for Protection, and endangering the
Roof vvhich cover'd the Cistern. The Commander in
Chief prevented this fear by ordering an high defence of

Wood lin'd with Earth, which secur'd the apprehensions
of either inconvenience, making holes too in the
common joyning of the Houses, next the Fortress, by
which they supply'd one the other securely.
         137. The Moors in the interim work't in the Mine,
vvhich vvas carried to Saint Iames's vvork, and being
by Ours found out, they on the inside put strong Abutements,
and opened some Vents, that the Fire might
spend it self, at the time of springing the Mine, it met
vvith such resistance in the Scarp, that carrying vvith it
part of the Work, it plaid vvithout the Fortress,An other Mine plays with loss to the Enemy. Killing
great numbers of those Souldiers and Miners, vvho
were employ'd in it, not one of Ours miscarrying, by
the Courtain of the Wall holding firm; it might be by
chance, but that so extraordinary, as it appear'd a miracle.
The Moors, vvhen the Mine plaid, did by vvhole
Companies get up on the ruins of the Work, vvhere
they vvere Resisted by our men, vvorn out by Watching,
vveakned by their Fasting and Wounds, and more
in Heart by the greatness of their Courage, then the
force of Nature,The great danger ours were in. yet so animated by honour and danger,
as they seem'd to Fight with fresh, and entire
strength, keeping off the wild Current of the Enemy
with his own loss; The place was of reception for more
to Fight upon, and the danger encreast by the inequality
of the numbers. The noise of Arms, and confusion
of Crys, interrupted all Commanding, and
Obeying; of the Moors many fell, but by the diligence
of the Commanders, others came in their place,
by which they gave Ours no respite, who from a farr
were thrown at by Darts and Arrows, and Fought
clos'd hand to hand. Thus did they for many hours
hold out the Fight. The Enemy gain'd so much as to
plant three Colours on the VVorks,The Enemy plants three Colours on St. Iames's work. which their great
numbers of Musquetteers defended; thence they descended
by the VVall to the Apostle Saint Iames's
Church, which joyns to the same VVork, and placed
themselves on the Top of it, so that one half of the

VVork and Church was kept by the Moors, and by us
the other.
         138. The night came on, and not Peace but Nature
put an end to the dispute; yet did they with wandering
and uncertain blows blindly continue the Battail. The
Commander in chief gave presently order for the casting
up a weak Work (which more divided then protected
us from the Enemy) which was made by stealth,
and with Swords in their hands; the Souldiers had no
other Lodging then the place they fought on, where,
not on their Arms, could they securely take a little repose,
neither had they conveniency of time or place
to dress their VVounds. The Commander indulg'd
himself no rest from his Arms, less from his Thoughts;
He that night Commanded the Levelling a Canon at
the Door of the Church, which commanded the
VVork, and with that gall'd the Moors, who while they
kept possession of what they had got, receiv'd no little
loss, till by a high Rampier they cover'd and secur'd
themselves.
         139. The danger by Sea, was not less then that by
Land;Luis de Mello departs from Bacaim. for immediately, upon the arrival of Antonio
Moniz's Carvel to Bacaim, the next day (the fourteenth
of August) Luis de Mello with fifteen Companions
embark'd on her, and after him Dom Iorge, and
Dom Duarte de Menezes with seventeen Souldiers in a
Fly-boat.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 3. Dom Antonio de Attayde, and Francisco Guilherme,
each in a Ship of his own, with fifteen Souldiers.
Luis de Mello presently put to Sea, but for the contrary
VVinds made but little way, the further he got off from
the shore, he found the Seas higher, and the Carvel
being but little, and loose, and the VVaves so great, as
by the force of the Storm to break over and flowre her,The dangers of his Voyage.
she ship't the water on both sides, which the Mariners,
every moment over-whelm'd, freed with Bucquets,
upon which both Grumets, and Souldiers, grown fearfull,
and out of heart, desir'd Luis de Mello to stand for his
Port again, saying, that with men they could Fight,

but not with the Elements; that 'twas now not Courage,
but Obstinacy, to lose themselves for nothing;
that against the wrath of God no Bravery could carry
it out. Luis de Mello went to quiet 'em, alledging, that
Antonio Moniz past in the same Vessel and same Storm;
that he had not with him better men then he, nor did
the Seas shew him more favour; that none without
danger atchiev'd great things; that when their Friends,
and Camrades were Fighting with the Turks, they were
not to wait for calm Seas, and fair Winds to go and relieve 'em;
that though the Waves swallow'd the Ship,
he would, on his Sword swim to Dio; that they should
go man the Sails, for God would help.
         140. The terrour, and shame of these words, did for
the present quiet 'em, so as that Evening and Night,
they were striving with the Storm, expecting every
Wave should overset 'em, and now wanting strength to
furnish their Duty, seeing the Tempests likely every
minute to grow bigger, Mariners and Souldiers agreed,
by force to compell Luis de Mello to Tack about, which
being told him by one G??mez de Quadras, a Souldier
under his command, he took all the Arms, and laying
'em up in the Gun-room, with his Sword in his hand
said, who ere spoke of going back, should be answer'd
by Stabbs;He resist those who would return. that none of their Lives was more Valuable
then his, that they should be afraid where he
was lost, to lose 'em; that they should look forward,
towards Dio, for that now, neither their honour, nor
safety had any other Port. The Souldiers seeing this
resolution, and the Mariners more afraid of the Commander,
then the Storm, pursu'd their Voyage, with
water always on Board, and drinking in Death, as if
every puff of Wind had been to Bury 'em; thus were
they Sailing in continual Shipwrack, till in the Evening
they came in sight of the Fortress, whence they were
perceiv'd with Joy and Amasement.He arrives a Dio and ells news of Dom Alvaro. The Moors at
their coming over the Barr ply'd 'em with Shot, but
they came without any hurt under the Fause-bray,

where the Commander came with an Over-joy to receive 'em;
who, was by Luis Mello assur'd, that Dom
Alvaro de Castro could not be two days behind, news
by every one entertain'd with such Rejoycing as reach't
the Moors, on which they concluded the Relief was
now at Sea, and Rumecaon resolv'd to streighten the
Siege. Luis de Mello with his men were quartered on
Saint Iames's work, the most part of which was held
by the Enemy, and which he had Garrison'd with the
best men of his Army, put there to Dye in defence of
what they had got.The other Gentlemen arrive. The next day arriv'd Dom Iorge,
and Dom Duarte de Menezes, having scap't with the same
resolution, as Luis de Mello, the same dangers; with this
Recruit, more considerable in quality then number, the
Warr seem'd to put on an other face.
         141. The new Guests importun'd Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
to let 'em see the Enemy, by setting on the
driving him out of Saint Iames's work, which he easily
granted, and resolv'd to bear them Company. All
provided against the next day, and when it broke,A sight in St. Iames's work. got
upon those Walls the Enemy had made for his Defence;
charging the Moors so Vigorously, as they forc't them
from that place, maugre the Courage and Opposition
they maintain'd themselves with; The noise before the
news reach't Rumecaon's Ears, who coming with all
his Force to that place, again engag'd with Ours, on
equality in the ground, but advantage in the number;
Here both sides fought it out, Hand to Hand, and Body
to Body, wounding one the other with short Weapons,
every one with his Blood and Life maintaining the
ground he stood upon. Ours with so inferiour a party
shew'd so much Gallanty, as the Moors without the
Works stood looking on with fear and wonder; yet,
the Enemies force having so much the Odds, he regain'd
that part of the Work he had won before, and
re-inforcing it with a double Garrison, ordered the giving
a general Assault to the Fortress. The Fight was
every where at the same heat, many of the Moors

drop't, some ta'ne off by the Sword, others burnt with
the Fire; but when the dispute was at the hottest, the
day began to over-cast with a great storm of Wind,
Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, as if in the Air was
kindled an other new Battail.
         142. The Moors, seeing our Match put out by the Rain,
and that neither our Pots of Powder, nor any other Fireworks
could do them any mischief, looking upon the
course or variety of the Weather as Divine favour, came
under covert in the midst of thick Rain, upon us without
fear, and with Shouts, and Crys, as if they had Heaven
on their side. This was the day, in which our men
shew'd the greatest Courage, and the Fortress was in the
greatest danger;The danger the Fortress was in, and the Courage of our men. because the Moors run upon our
Lances and Swords, either Brutish, or Valiant. Six hours
lasted this so resolute Assault, till the day turn'd clear
again, and our men began to make use of their Pots of
Powder, with which they Burnt not a few, whose sight
cool'd the others Courage, making them Fight more
Cautiously till the close of the Day, and Rumecaons
sounding a Retreat;Rumecaon retires with great loss. when he left, four hundred Dead,
and above a thousand Wounded; of ours seven Dy'd,
the Wounded were more. All the Gentlemen of the
Recruit were in this Assault, giving the same proofs of
their Courage and Birth; Dom Iohn Mascarenhas play'd
by turns the prudent Commander and stout Souldier,
always present in danger, without prostituting his
Command. Our men past that night with Watching,
having for their so near Neighbours the Enemy, who
had, for the straightness he held the Besieged in, receiv'd
new Honours from the Sultan,The Enemy is recruited. and a Recruit of five
thousand Foot was come to him, with many Turk-Officers,
whom Rumecaon desir'd should be presently
brought to face our men, that by shewing them with
whom he had to do, he might justifie his Actions.
         143. The day after the Assault, came over the Barr
Dom Antonio de Attayde,The other Gentlemen arrive at Dio. and Francisco Guilherme, who
found not the Seas less Boisterous then those we have

spoke of; who reported Dom Alvaro de Castro could
not be missing a day, having made the Fleet set out
with this Order, that no Ship should stay for an other.
The Souldiers, for this News and Recruit, kept Holyday
with Musick, and continual Dancing, which made
the dangers of the Siege go onely for a pass-time.
         144. Rumecaon, having notice there were already arriv'd
some Recruits at the Fortress,Rumecaon despairs of the design. and thinking when
the Weather opened, the Portuguese would not be backward
to assist one the other in the greatest Dangers,
began to despair of the design, seeing hardships shook
not our mens Resolutions,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. and that his Souldiers in their
Discourses did not allow the cause of the Warr, accusing
the Breakers of that Peace we kept so inviolably;
He was afraid of some dispositions he saw for a mutiny,
which, by aggravating the miserable condition of
Ours, and the infallibility of their Victory, he Labour'd
to prevent. He paid the Souldiers, and commanded the
They are Judges, Preachers, and Governours of Colledges. Cacizes to Preach the certainty of Glory for all those
who Dy'd in this Warr, and the Rewards, which for defending
their Country, they were to receive from the
Sultan, not forgetting to joyn the Temporal, with the
Spiritual. And Mines not being so Dangerous as
Storming, and of more Execution, he resolv'd to go on
with them; on this design, he commanded the opening
a great Mine, in that tract of the VVall which from
Saint Iohns work goes untill it end in Antonio Pecanha's
Centry-house; but our men being caution'd (though
subtil, and contriving Rumecaon, sap't under the other
VVorks,He opens an other Mine, which is prevented. commanding his men by night to make a noise
there, by that diversion to keep from us his intention)
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas had notice of the Mine, against
which, as at other times, he secur'd himself, the Gentlemen
working to prevent it, whose example eas'd the
Labour of the Souldiers.
         145. VVhen 'twas time to spring the Mine, the
whole Army mov'd,It plays and our men defend the Breaches. and begun to surround the Fortress;
there came before two Sanjacks commanding a

Company of Turks, who were to enter at the Breaches
presum'd upon at the playing of the Mine, which with
a hideous Noise carry'd into the Air the whole face of
the Wall; The Turks, though blind with Smoak, and
Dust, (the force of the Fire had rais'd) ran presently
on, but found the opposition of an other VVall, the
Fire either had not reach't, or had prov'd too strong;
yet seeing Antonio Pecanha's Watch-house open in three
places, carrying thither their Arms, they endeavoured
to gain it; but our men, as to the weakest place came to
its Relief, stopping the Current of the Enemy.
         146. Here the dispute was for a while close and hot,
the Besiegers and Besieg'd, as it were Fighting in a plain
Campagnia, and Rumecaon believing, that there was
all our force, Commanded 'em to fall on the other
VVorks, where too the Portuguese entertain'd 'em with
their Swords. The Enemy that day shot infinite Bullets
into the Fortress, which, though That was almost
raz'd, did no harm, an accident which for its rareness
look't like a miracle.The Enemy retires. The Fight lasted some hours, the
Enemy retiring with his usual loss, we with our ordinary
good fortune.
         147. Rumecaon, who now thought himself reproach'd
by the length of the Siege, as one who to justifie
himself, went in quest of dangers, and difficulties,
the next day in Person fell upon Saint Thomas's work,
commanding several Officers to Scale the other vvorks,
which made those days Storming go for a successive
assault.Rumecaon falls upon St. Thomas's work. The Moors fought here, more Desperately then
Valiantly, making haste, though run through with
Lances, and Swords at once, to Dye, and Kill; readier
to offend, then save themselves, seeking Death as the
gate to that imaginary Glory, promis'd 'em by the Cacizes,
who in favour of the design, and to beget in the
Souldiers a contempt of their Lives, continually prest
that Diabolical incentive. In this heat, did they for
some hours endure the Crisis of the Battail, with the
loss of fourscore, upon whose Bodies they continued

Fighting, forc't on by the grief and loss of their slain
Camrades. They in fine behav'd themselves with such
resolution, as to keep that part of the VVork where the
Fight was, planting on it their Colours, covering themselves
with Trenches and Barricados.
         148. The dispute in Saint Iames's work was not
cooler, the Enemies had twice got it, but met with so
gallant a resistance,How it went in St. Iames's work. as at no little expence of Blood
they again lost it; The fire the Enemy cast amongst us
here was so much, that our men fought in Flames, having
no other remedy for their Relief, then to cool
themselves in Barrils of water. Antonio Moniz Barretto,
was, with but two other Souldiers on the VVork, repelling
the fury of the Enemy, and Moniz, stepping off
to allay the heat of the Fire in the Barril, was seis'd on
by one of 'em, saying, Ah Signior Moniz, will you let
the King's work be lost? I'me all on Fire (answered he)
and go to bathe in the Tubbs, if your Arms (reply'd
the Souldier) are well enough to Fight, all the rest is
nothing; whose hints Moniz accepted, so pleas'd with
the Souldiers courage as he got him his discharge, and
brought him with him for Portugall, generously confessing
his own backwardness, to the others advantage,
and always calling him by an honourable Title, The
Souldier of the Fire; neither do the relations of this
Action, make him known to us by any other name.
         149. In this, and the other VVorks they this day
fought,The Enemy retires again. with equal courage and danger, which we will
not particularly relate, because the Circumstances do
so agree, as looking like the same thing repeated, the
Writing, and Reading would be tedious; yet, though
the relation of this Siege doth not by its variety delight,
who will deny this Action to be one of the most famous
in human Story, which as so was valued by the
most Warlick nations of Asia, and Europe? Upon the
Enemies retiring, we fortify'd our selves in the ruins of
the Fortress, where we were continually on our
Guards.
         
            
150. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas the next day, sent out
Antonio Correa with twenty Companions in a Carak,Antonio Correa goes out to look for some Prize.
a Souldier of great Courage, whose Birth (but by his
Actions, which deserve, or suppose it Eminent) we
know not. He got over the Barr, and Coasting the
Island as was commanded him, without any Prize return'd;
but as stout Souldiers satisfie not themselves
with brave unless successfull Actions, Correa (more desperate
then obedient) return'd to tempt Fortune five
times on the same Errand; but that which seem'd
chance, was Mystery, and Heaven decreed or permitted
the stout Souldier should be obstinate in the
design, who is to blame himself if his own fault procur'd
his misfortune. He in fine, with too importune
Curiosity, return'd, to provoke or know his Fortune,
and standing up with the Island, perceiv'd a Fire at a
distance, which made it seem less, but Rowing towards
that place, leaving his Companions in the Boat, went
on Shore, and walk't a while alone, till the light of the
Fire discovered twelve Moors, who were warming themselves
about it; immediately he return'd pleas'd to his
Companions, bidding 'em leave their Boat, for now
they had in their power the Prize they sought for, yet
the Souldiers, either forgetting themselves, or Ministers
of an higher providence, went not with him, making
way for their Commanders fortune, who seeing the
Souldiers base resolution, went alone to the Moors,
having heart enough to go attempt that danger, he
could not master; on a suddain he set upon the Moors,
who surpris'd with so unlook't for an Assault,Sets upon twelve Moors, who take him. some fled,
the rest, but Faintly and Timerously stood to their
Defence, but coming to themselves, and seeing themselves
Hack't but by one man, began with more resolution
to resist him, those also who were fled came
back to joyn in the Defence, and while Antonio Correa
was at blows with some of 'em, others behind
mastered him, and after taking him, like a Beast kept
him Ty'd, and so carry'd him to Rumecaon, in credit

of their Prize, shewing the VVounds they had receiv'd.
         151. Rumecaon commanded he should be loos'd,
asking him how many men were in the Fortress?He is carry'd before Rumecaon, if the
Governour intended to come to Dio? with what
force, and in what time his Son was expected? he with
great assurance answered him, that there were in the
Fortress six hundred men, who were every day earnest
with the Commander to lead 'em forth to the Camp;
that they very shortly look't for Dom Alvaro to come
with fourscore Vessels, who upon his arrival would
Sally forth into the Campagnia, because some Galleys
he brought with him wanted Turkish Slaves;
that the Governour was preparing greater Forces, because
at once he would determine the business of Cambaya.
Rumecaon who knew the truth of our strength,
envy'd so brave a Soul in so low Fortune, and esteeming
him as a Souldier, who in Chains despis'd him, ask't him
to turn Moor, that he might in a better Religion have
better Fortune,Who perswades him to change his Religion. and know the difference there was
'twixt serving a rich Monarck, and poor Pyrats. The
stout Cavallier scandalis'd at the Affront of so base Civilities,
told him, The Portuguese were always ready to
shed their Blood for their Religion, and King; that
Mahamed was an Impostor, infamous for his Actions and
Doctrine; that if there were in Cambaya any Renegados,
they were of other Nations, as was his Father
Coge-Sofar, whom, as a Monster of the place he was
Born in, his Parents and Country own'd not as their
Son.
         152. Rumecaon not able to endure from a Slave the
affronts of his Religion and Person,How he useth him. kindled with
Zeal and Contempt, commanded, that before taking
away his Life, he should in his presence be beaten and
spit upon, believing the Punishment not so much to
him as the scorn, then ordered, he should in disgrace and
deriion go naked through the Streets, a Barbarous
inventor of so new a Punishment, first against Man,

then against Humanity; yet did this Souldier of Christ
(like one, now a Souldier of an other Militia) with
a softer Courage overcome by suffering. Rumecaon,
after these affronts, saying, his Prophets honour demanded
satisfaction in Blood,He commands he should be Beheaded. commanded he should be
Beheaded, and the Palm, he deserv'd as a Souldier, he
obtain'd as a Martyr; his Head was put upon a Pike,
and set, where from the Fortress our men might see it,
who as Souldiers, out of a natural but unjust Compunction
vow'd to revenge his Blood, as Catholicks, envy'd
his Death. The next day, those who were in his Company
return'd, whom the Commander, respecting the
time, would neither see or punish; yet did they expiate
their fault, by venturing on all occasions, like men who
loath'd Life without honour. Many of 'em accus'd by
their Conscience, design'd their own Death. The
Moors at a distance mock't and geer'd at us, pointing at
Antonio Correa's Head, recompensing so many losses with
that satisfaction, and grown by it more daring, did in
contempt of us some extraordinary Actions.
         153. Between Saint Thomas's and Saint Iames's work
was our Colours planted; which one of the Moors
(believing he could without danger effect it, the Wall
being Low, and not Guarded) had a mind to take
away; coming by stealth and unseen of our men,
getting up by the Ruins, he got hold of the Staff, and
though he by forcing mov'd it, yet could he not carry it
away, and quitting out of fear his hold left it Leaning;
seeing how little his first attempt cost him, return'd
with the same Caution in quest of the Colours, and as
he was reaching out his Arm to take hold of it,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. one of
our Souldiers with a Musquet-shot Kill'd him. This
hapned in face of the Camp, who for his first exploit
entertain'd him with Shouts and Praises, now look't
upon him falling with a profound silence. Ours ran in
great haste to cut off his Head, which they so planted,
as with it to confront Antonio Correa's.
         154. The Moors who were fortify'd in Saint Thomas's

work, went on at the purchase of their Blood, getting
ground inch by inch, carrying always before 'em Mountains
of Earth, and Boughs, with which they covered
and fortify'd themselves. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas commanded
the bringing a great Canon to the Church
door, which lying higher then the Moors, had 'em for
a mark, from whence he so furiously Gall'd 'em, as to
break their Defences, and with the loss of a great many,
make 'em Dislodge.
         155. The Fortress vvas now raz'd,The extremities of the Fortress. and the Portuguese
instead of Walls defended their own Ruins, the Enemy
vvithin the VVorks at the gates of Victory; of the
Provisions, some the time had Corrupted, the rest for
their quality vvere Unwholsome, from vvhence proceeded
so malign Diseases, as the vvell receiv'd more hurt
by the Infection, then from the Enemy.
         156. Dom Alvaro de Castro vvas departed Bacaim
vvith fifty Ships,Dom Alvaro is forc't back. (so they call any Boats in India be
they European Carvels, or Vessels vvith Oars) and being
Over-laded vvith Ammunition and Provision, not able
to Live in so great Seas, they vvere, shattered and
loose, forc't to alter their course, and recover diverse
Bays and Creeks, as the vveather drove 'em. Amongst
those Ships vvhich vvere scattered by the Storm, was
that commanded by Athanasio Freire, vvho standing in
for the Land, vvas cast into the Bay of Cambaya, almost
quite sunk, and in such a condition, as by common consent
they agreed to run on Shore at the first Land they
made, counting Life more prisable then Liberty; accordingly
they run a-ground near Surat, vvhere they
vvere taken Slaves, and carry'd to Sultan Mahumed,
vvho sent 'em away Prisoners, and commanded 'em to
be put in the same Dungeon vvhere he kept Simaon Feo
vvith other Portuguese.
         157. Ruy Freire vvho came in Conserve vvith Dom
Alvaro,Ruy Freire arrives at Dio. in a Ship of his own, and Souldiers paid at his
own Charge, did better keep the Seas, and Sailing that
day and the next in the Storm, came in sight of the Coast

of Dio, whence he lay in for the Fortress, and coming
over the Barr got to an Anchor under the Fause-bray,
where he was by every one welcomed, and told the
Commander in chief the news of Dom Alvaro's coming,
as much expected as necessary, not then knowing
any thing of his going back, of which we shall give an
account.
         158. Dom Alvaro de Castro,Dom Alvaro keeps on his Voyage. and Dom Francisco de
Menezes, were with the general Storm forc't back to
Agacaim, all shattered; where they quickly fitted
themselves, and with most part of their Fleet ventured
to Sea again, and over-coming the fury of the weather
got sight of the other Coast near Madrefaual, whence
they made at a distance a great Ship which came stealing
by our Fleet. Dom Alvaro commanded the Captain
to make up with her, as did two Ships more of the
Company. The Ship presently stroke Sail, being the
King of Cambaya's, and coming from Ormus, she sent
off two Merchants who came and presented Dom Alvaro
their pass, sign'd before the Warr;He takes a hip of Cambaya. who seis'd on
the Ship, and sent her to Goa, that the Governour
might determine if she was to be made Prize; The
Commodities in her were Coral, Chamlots, Pintados,
and Carpets, all which were judg'd to be lost. Dom
Alvaro de Castro holding on his course arriv'd at the Barr
of Dio with forty Ships, with their Wast-cloths, Streamers,
and Pendents, making a show both warlick and
pleasant.He arrives at the Fortes with forty Ships. He saluted the Fortress with all his Guns,
which, with the sounding of Drums and Trumpets return'd
him the like answer. The Commander in chief
made the Gates of the Fortress be opened to receive
Dom Alvaro, all the Gentlemen, and Souldiers too,
came to receive and welcome the Fleet,His reception by the Commander in chief. on which besides
Dom Alvaro in Person, came Gentlemen and Cavalliers
of eminent condition; they brought Ammunition
and Provision for some time, the Governour
not willing to have it at the Courtesie of the Seas, to
deny or give passage to a second Relief. Dom Alvaro

took up his quarters in the Work vvhere his Brother
Dom Fernando fell, those who formerly had been under
his Command came to serve under Dom Alvaro, and
most of the Gentlemen, some as having bore a part in
the sorrow for his Brother, others in his Victories; all too
vvould take the word from him, as Admiral at Sea, not
one being vvilling to be exempted from his Command,
a thing contrary to the Time, and more to Discipline;
yet Dom Alvaro told the Commander, he came to receive
orders from him, which Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
taking for a Civility, answered vvith the same Courtship;
but Dom Alvaro shew'd him his instructions, which
vvere not the least part of the other excellencies of the
Governour, to say, that, though by the Jurisdiction of
his Place, and the King's Commission, he himself vvas
exempt from any subjection vvhich belong'd not to the
Governour of India, he sent his Son Dom Alvaro to receive
orders from Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, the great
Honour he had gain'd in that Siege so requiring it; a
temper in a man truly great, vvhere he had already lost
one Son and ventur'd an other, to covet none of that
Fame, he vvith his Blood help't to purchase, greater
doubtless in this Neglect, then afterwards in his Victory.
         159. Rumecaon knowing of Dom Alvaro's arrival,
said, there vvere now Prisoners in the Fortress to honour
his Triumph, and commmanded his men to work
more eagerly in the Mines.Both advise the Governour of the condition of the Fortress. Dom Alvaro immediately
dispatch't his Ship to the Governour with Letters, intimating
in vvhat condition he found the Fortress, and
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas advis'd him of all had past.
There vvere now six hundred men in the Fortress, all
Souldiers of repute, whom, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
thought capable of greater things, then only a Defence;
he commanded the planting three great Guns against
the Enemies Posts, vvith vvhich he so furiously Batter'd
'em, that Rumecaon, as intent to defend himself as spoil
us, re-inforc't his Fortification.
         
            
160. There was in the former assaults, Buried in the
ruins of Saint Thomas's works, a great Gun of an extravagant
bigness, which the Commander was earnest to
get up into the Fortress, and imploying Ropes and
Machines, found it impossible, desiring so at least to
secure it, as the Enemies might make no use of it, he
ordered it to be ty'd there with great Cords. The Moors
continued digging under the Walls of the Work, and
striking on the bottom Stones, by the failing of the
Foundation the VValls fell down, the great Gun remaining
ty'd and suspended in the Air.The Enemy falls on again and retires. The Moors came
presently on to enter the Work, but found in their way
Dom Francisco de Menezes, with others about him, who
engag'd the Moors in a very hot dispute, and that being
the first day of their seeing the Enemy, they charg'd
him with such Vigour, as he was forc't to retire, leaving
many of his men on the place. In the height of the
Fight, some of 'em fasting a great Cabell to the Gun
dragg'd it off, unseen of Ours, who engag'd in the Fight,
did not take notice what the Moors were doing.
         161. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas did vigilantly attend
the designs of the Enemy,Our men resolve to go out and seek him. more afraid of their Mines,
then being Assaulted openly; which coming to the
knowledge of Dom Alvaro's Souldiers, warn'd by the
late example of Dom Fernando de Castro, and other
Gentlemen, and Souldiers, who were Burnt to Death,
they all agreed to Sally out and Fight the Enemy, fearfull
where the danger was doubtfull, resolute where
'twas certain.
         162. They said they would not by their useless obedience
be Burnt to Death, when they might Dye in the
Field, with Victory or Revenge; that knowing how to
Fight like men, they would not perish like Beasts, fastned
to their danger; that of two, they rather chose
that they might overcome, then that they could not
avoid.The Commander goes about to disswade 'em, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, first by Reason, then by
the Authority of his Place, and Person, did what he
could to disswade 'em, but in vain, because (as their

crime had some semblance of Virtue) they were proud
of it, and expected rewards and praises for their Disobedience.
Dom Alvaro de Castro help't to keep 'em
back, much disgusted by so foul an obstinacy,as do Dom Alvaro and Dom Francisco saying,
the King would be more sensible of the disobedience
of one Souldier, then the loss of a Fortress; that it
belong'd only to the Commander to Govern, to them
to Obey and Fight. Dom Francisco de Menezes told 'em
they were the first who would Defame the name of
Portuguese; that they would go with their Honour lost,
their Lives in no little danger, and though they scap't
the arms of their Enemy, they could not free themselves
from the just anger of their King, whom, by so
base a Mutiny, they in the Person of his Commander,
despis'd. For all this, with a fatal resoluteness did they
provide to give Battel, saying, no fault could be such,
as Victory would not excuse, and if they were lost, they
were exempt from reward or punishment; that they
stood up for the honour of the State, whose Custom,
was rather to take places on the Moors, then lose its
own.
         163. All the mutinous Souldiers could be brought
to,The Souldiers hold their resolution. was to put off their Sallying forth till the next day,
having left 'em for their Counsellour that so short time
to consider, what was best for their safety, and honour;
They, by a fatal unanimity, all rose resolute and ready
for the Fight, telling the Commander if he would not
command 'em, they would amongst themselves chuse a
Head.The Commander in chief and Gentlemen to prevent greater mischief resolve to go with 'em. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, seeing himself now forc't
to go along with the unruly; and that standers by
would judge more advantagiously of the daring, then
prudent; resolv'd in Person, with Dom Alvaro, and most
of the Gentlemen, to follow 'em; the Commanders by
a new Discipline obeying, and the Souldiers commanding.
         164. There were in the Fortress (as we have said)
six hundred men, of whom one hundred staid to maintain
the Posts, of the rest, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas made

three Battallions, two he gave two Dom Alvaro de
Castro, and Dom Francisco de Menezes, the other he took
for himself.Our men Sally out, and in what order. They immediately Sally'd out of the Fortress,
and at the first charge got the Posts the Moors
had made in the Ditch, who on easie terms quitted
'em. By this shaddow of Victory began our ruine; for
our men ambitious, and out of order, assaulted the
Wall.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. The first who got up was Dom Alvaro, seconded
by two Brothers, Luis de Mello, and Iorge de Mendoca,
who came up after him; Dom Francisco de Menezes
entred at an other place; and amongst the first were
Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom
Iorge, and Dom Duarte de Menezes, Dom Francisco, and
Dom Pedro de Almeyda.
         165. Rumecaon, Iuzarcaon, and Mojateaon,The Enemies resistance. came
with numerous Companies to receive ours, 'twixt whom
the Fight began, maintain'd on our side with more
Courage then Discipline; Dom Francisco de Menezes
was forcing back the Moors, who not able to endure
the weight of the charge lost ground apace, till reliev'd
by a great many others, they stop't the Current of our
men. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas climbing up the Wall, at
the same time with the other Officers,The Captain chides the Mutineers. seeing diverse of
the mutinous Souldiers, standing at the foot of it, without
the hearts to get up, with sharp words, did aloud upbraid,
first their Disobedience, then their Cowardliness,
who without a word follow'd him, striving to answer by
their Actions, and presently charging the Enemies who
were engag'd with Dom Alvaro, made 'em quit part of
their ground; but the party being so inequal, the Moors
began to recover, so charging Ours, as to put 'em to
disorder.
         166. Dom Alvaro behav'd himself,The Courage and Discipline of Dom Alvaro. as his Birth, Repute,
and Courage promis'd, not being at a loss in
Discipline, hard to be kept up when the day is lost;
He was, as much as possible, Ordering and Leading off
his men, Retreating honourably with his face always
towards the Enemy, who had cut off some of his men,

and the rest, not able to endure the force of the Moors,
were leaving him; which Iorge de Mendoca perceiving,
though Wounded, took Dom Alvaro in his hands to
help him up the Wall, and not able by the bleeding of
his Wounds to perform it,He gets upon the Wall, and with a blow of a Stone falls down. was help't by his Brother
Luis de Mello; Dom Alvaro being upon the Wall, receiv'd
a blow with a stone, which made him without any
sign of Life fall down on the other side.
         167. After Luis de Mello had help't Dom Alvaro,Luis de Mello is shot through with a Bullet. he
likewise sav'd his Brother, who was with Garcia Rodriguez
de Tavora, Antonio Moniz, and other Gentlemen,
repelling the fury of the Moors, till shot through with
a Bullet he fell down for Dead; his Companions carry'd
him off, and laid him on the VVall, thence was he
brought to the Fortress, afterwards conveigh'd to Chaul,
where he Dy'd of his Wound, deserving, by his singular
Courage, if not a more glorious Death, a longer
Life.
         168. Dom Francisco de Menezes, as he was Fighting
stoutly,Dom Francisco de Menezes's Death. was tane off with a Bullet, at whose loss his
men began disorderly to retire; here was the Execution
greatest, for the Moors knowing our mens confusion
charg'd 'em more Vigorously.
         169. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas in this misfortune behav'd
himself with Courage,The prudence of the Commander in chief. and Prudence, some times
Leading off his men, other times facing the Enemy,
(whilst the Mutinous were retiring) by this course
avoiding no little mischief; and having now secur'd the
Walls, there went a report the Fortress was lost, on
which the Souldiers like Routed men, began every one
to disperse; in this so dangerous Conflict, Dom Iohn
Mascarenhas cry'd to his men, shaming them with their
going off, and Fighting so couragiously that only with
a few who stood to him he kept off the Enemy. The
Gentlemen who were in the Fight, got a loud name in
so unhappy a Day. Lopo de Sousa at the foot of the
Wall defended himself against a whole Company of
Moors, making them often retire, with such Bravery,

that they charg'd him at a distance, till by a Dart which
past his Breast he fell down Dead, leaving his Blood
sufficiently reveng'd.The Gentlemen who were that day taken notice of. Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia
Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom Duarte, and Dom Iorge de Menezes,
who had seventeen Wounds, made the Victory
dear to the Enemy.
         170. Rumecaon endeavouring to make the best of
our Rashness,Mojatecaon falls upon the Fortress and retires. commanded Mojatecaon with five thousand
men to march to the Fortress, to intercept those
who were flying in the Rout, and falling upon Saint
Thomas's work, he found Luis de Sousa there, who with
Canon and Musquet-shot, Kill'd great numbers of his
men, yet the Moors emboldned with the heat of Victory,
continued Scaling, but were so stoutly resisted,
as with notorious loss to retire.The Commander in chief Rallies the Souldiers. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
took such pains, as he Rally'd those men who were
scatteringly going off, and making of them a close Battallion,
led 'em on to the Fortress, meeting by the way
many of the Moors, who being careless in the security of
Victory, he so Couragiously charged 'em, as many left
their Lives, more the Place. There were lost in this
miscarriage five and thirty men, of whose number were
the Gentlemen we have spoke of;Our loss by this miscarriage. the Wounded were
above an hundred, but in so unbridled a design, the loss
was not so much as the disobedience. The Commander
in chief went presently to look out Dom Alvaro, whom
he found yet Speechless, and by the judgment of Chirurgions
in danger of Life, which lasted those days
Philosophy calls Decretory or Critical; yet his pain
abated, and Dom Alvaro recovered his health, to the
satisfaction of those, who lov'd him for the quality of
his Birth, and Person. Nuno Pereira was in the Fight,
who behaving himself with known Courage, came off
with fourteen Wounds;History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. he desired leave for his Cure
to go to Goa, having there a Family, and being lately
Married to a great Fortune, most of which he spent in
the King's service, till (as we shall tell hereafter) he
lost his Life.
         
            
171. Rumecaon reflecting on this so unexpected Victory,Rumecaon is encouraged by the success;
got by our mens unruly Courage, had more hopes
of success, and a stronger resolution to see the end of
the design; for which he begun to find his mens obedience
more pliable, having by this days experience
lost a great deal of that fear they had of our Arms; he
presently sent the Sultan news of the Victory, which was
at Court solemnis'd with publick Rejoycings; and Rumecaon
receiv'd from the King the honours of a Conquerour,
being for the future better supply'd with Men,
Ammunition, and Money, on the coming in of a great
part of the Nobility, in hopes to go share in his Fortune:goes on with his Mines and we with our Reparations.
He presently commanded his men to go on with
the design against our Work, stealing the Earth from
underneath, that being unfurnish't the weight might
sink it, by the failing of the Foundation on which it
rested, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas deluded this Plot, by
ordering an other Fort to be made within, which took
a less compass, and by containing less Earth was fitter
for defence. This could not be hid from Rumecaon,
who brought thither a great party of Moors, these with
Stones, Darts, and Balls of Wild-fire, did without intermission
charge our Work-men, some sure of their aim
in those places the Wall discovered, others by casting
over it, by which they Wounded our men, more intent
on their Work then Defence, to avoid which, the Commander
gave order they should by hidden Lights work
by Night, laying the Stones by the marks and observation
they had taken by Day.
         172. Rumecaon high, and confident, on the countenance
the Warr shew'd him in the last Fight, in contempt
of the Governours coming, every day expected,
began (as one who would in his imaginary Victory
already enjoy the ease of Triumph) to Build a new
City;Builds a new City. whether 'twere to put his men in heart, or as a
Credulous man, he grounded upon the prosperity of his
imagin'd successes. He made Palaces for himself, with
that Order and Grandeur, the wantonness of Peace

would have allow'd off; He set out quarters for the
Officers, by that, obliging 'em to defend their own
Dwellings, shewing in the Fabrick, no less Skil, then
Pride: He ordered the laying Boats across in that place
of the River which goes from the Custom-house to
the Town of Rumes, which being made fast with great
Cabels, he fill'd equally with Earth, o're which, (as
on a Bridge not steady, but secure) the Carts which
provided the City had an easie passage. Upon Rumecaon's
confident setting upon so costly a Fabrick, 'twas
Voic't in many of the adjacent and remote Kingdoms
from Cambaya, that we had lost our Fortress, which report
pleasing the ears of the Moors, and Pagans, spread
all over the East, till the Sultan receiv'd the Complements
of many Princes who gave him the joy of the
Victory. The sound of this News was with fear and
silence listned to in Goa, and though at large, and without
an Author, came to the Governours ears, who by
the privacy and caution with which it went from one
an other, did argue its probability.
         173. This misfortune so much fear'd,The sollicitousness of the Governour. seem'd confirm'd
by the slowness of advice from Dio, neither was
there any certainty what was become of Dom Alvaro's
Fleet; those who would put by such thoughts in the
Governour, seem'd rather to slight, then deny the news,
and he as most concern'd, seeing the necessity of encouraging
the people, seem'd not to lay it to heart,
contradicting the News he fear'd, by the Face he put
upon't.
         174. This sollicitousness took up the Governour,Dom Manoel de Lima arrives from the Kingdome, at Goa.
(only diverted by the business and preparations of the
Navy, which, omitting no diligence, he intended)
when News was brought him, there was come to the
Barr a Ship from the Kingdome, Captain Dom Manoel
de Lima, who was parted from five more of the same
Conserve, all under the Command of Lourenco Pirez de
Tavora; the others were Commanded by Dom Iohn
Lobo, Iohn Rodriguez Pecanha, Fernand Alvarez da

Cunha, and Alvaro Barradas. The Governour thought
Dom Manoel de Lima's arrival very considerable, for the
Person, and the necessity; he came Commander of the
Fortress of Ormus, which the King had given him to
put by some animosities which were 'twixt him and the
Governour Martin Affonso de Sousa, whose return from
India he expected, to demand satisfaction of him for
some injuries. These disgusts the King took up, concern'd
as a Father in the peace of both his Subjects.
Dom Manoel would presently have been gon for Dio,
with three hundred Souldiers at his own Charge; but
the Governour disswaded him, desiring his Company in
his Fleet, and his Courage and Experience in the management
of the present Design.
         175. The Governour being more then ordinarily
perplex't about the business of Dio,The Governour receives news from Dio. thinking no good of
the want of advice, the Admiral, which carry'd Dom
Alvaro, arriv'd at the Barr of Goa; She came in with her
Wast-cloaths and Streamers, and by her joyfull Salutes,
endeavour'd a farr off to tell the news she was fraught
with. The greatest part of the people ran to the Seaside,
to enquire after their Children, Friends and Kindred,
and those least concern'd, after the common interest
of the State. The Captain was carried to the Governours
Palace, satisfying by the way many repeated and
troublesome questions; He found the Governour with
the Bishop Dom Iohn de Albuquerque, and Friar Antonio
do Casal Guardian of the Fanciscans. The Governours
first question was,His piety and joy a the receipt of 'em. if the Fortress yet held out for the
King his Master? to which the Captain answered, it
did and would do; At vvhich news the Governour falling
on his Knees, vvith his Eyes to Heaven gave God
thanks, not vvithout shedding some tears, vvitnesses, of
his piety towards God, and his zeal for his Prince, and
receiving presently his Letters,His stout behaviour at the news of his Son Dom Fernando's Death. he heard the Death of
his Son Dom Fernando, vvhich he receiv'd vvith so great
constancy, as those about him perceiv'd no alteration
in his Words or Countenance, as if to appear a Father,

had been weakness, and to have the common affections
of a man, dishonour. He thank't the Captain, and sent
him to chear the City with the news; then retir'd, and
in private wept for his Son, expecting time to grieve in,
without lessning his place or courage. The same day
came into Port the Ship which brought Nuno Pereira,
who Dy'd at Sea of his Wounds. The body was Buried,
with the Funeral solemnity due to the Person, accompany'd
by the Governour, Nobility and People; the
Gentleman leaving behind him a most endear'd Memory.
         176. The next day there was made a solemn Procession
to thank God,A procession for Thanksgiving. at which the Governour assisted,
Cloath'd in Scarlet, comforting (a thing unheard of)
the people for the Death of his own Son; He knew
by this Ship, of our mens disorderly and obstinate Sally,
which occasion'd so many Deaths, and of the danger
Dom Alvaro was in, moderating, or smothering his grief
for't, as one who less valued his Sons Lives, then their
Reputation.
         177. On the same day he dispatch't Vasco de Cunha,He sends relief to Dio.
that Sailing along the Creeks and Bays of the Coast,
he might bring together Dom Alvaro's Fleet, and carry
it into Dio??? by him in his Letters, he Congratulated
with Dom Iohn Mascarenhas for the honour he had
gain'd, not less for himself then the State; assuring
him, that in few days he would come and see him at
Dio, with all the strength the State could furnish, for
which he spar'd no cost or diligence; and that while
the Fleet was setting out, he would send him a Recruit,
sufficient to secure the Fortress, and bridle the Enemy,
which he speedily effected; for presently after Vasco de
Cunha, he sent away Luis de Almeyda with six Carvels,
and four hundred Souldiers, with Ammunition and Provision,
and plenty of other things which the necessity
of the Siege requir'd; and so indefatigable was his diligence
in providing himself, that in a very short time all
his Fleet was ready to Sail, only wanting the relief of

Cananor and Cochim to put to Sea; for with such affection
and obedience, was he forwarded by every one,
as the Ladies and Gentlemen of Goa, came and presented
him with their Children and Estates; that Fleet
carrying with it as many blessings from the people, as
others use to carry tears and complaints.
         178. Vasco da Cunha following his Orders,Vasco d Cuha comes to . was bringing
together the Ships, which he found in the Creeks
shattered by the Storm, and with them recovered Bacaim,
where he found the Commander Dom Ieronymo
de Menezes ready with fifteen Ships to go and relieve
Dio; engag'd anew by his resentments of his Brother
Dom Francisco's Death, of which we have given an acccount,
yet had he some days deferr'd his going, upon
certain advice, that the Bramatuco would in his absence
come and Besiege that Fortress,History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 8. Lib. 3. a diversion procur'd by
the Sultan, in favour of the Besiegers. Dom Ieronymo
looking upon himself more oblig'd to defend Bacaim,
then relieve Dio, delivered his Ships to Vasco da Cunha,
who setting Sail with 'em, met at Sea Luis de Almeyda
with six Carvels,He, with Luis de Almeyda goes into Dio. all of them in Conserve went into
Dio, making shew by the number of the Vessels of a
more considerable Recruit, yet was the Fortress secur'd
from Famine and Danger, and the Souldiers being
paid and furnish't, the Warr was less fear'd then
desir'd.
         179. Now was the VVeather fair for us,Luis de Almeyda goes to look for the Mecca Fleet. and the
States Ships began to Command at Sea; Dom Alvaro,
as Admiral, ordered Luis de Almeyda with three Carvels
(all of 'em under his Command, in two of 'em went
Captains Payo Rodriguez de Aravjo, and Pedro Affonso)
to stand for the Barr of Surat, and expect the Mecca
Fleet, which would strive to recover that Port; who
pursuing his Voyage, within few days saw two Ships
crossing the Gulf, one great one, the other of a less
Burden; as soon as Luis de Almeyda spy'd 'em, with all
the Sail he could make, he stood up with 'em; the Ships
came before the Wind, and seeing our Carvels tack't

about, but our Ships being light, and better Sailers,
with all their Canvas abroad, were up with 'em presently.
Luis de Almeyda Boarded the great Ship, which had
for Captain a Ianizary, a Kinsman of Coge-Sofars, who
relying on the bigness of his Ship, his Guns and Men
aboard, provided for his defence, provoking on all parts
a very hot dispute, the Blood run down on both sides,
the Moors fought out of necessity, Ours out of duty,
and having the advantage of Courage and Discipline
entred the Vessel,he takes two Ships, where the Moors, inspirited with
despair fought to Dye reveng'd, till with the Death of
the most considerable, the rest yielded. They found the
Ianizary full of Wounds, whom Luis de Almeyda made
be carry'd aboard his Carvel, and his Cure attended.
The other Ship on a slight resistance was made yield by
Payo Rodriguez de Aravjo.he goes with 'em to Dio. After this action, Luis de
Almeyda, while his Commission lasted, ply'd too and
again in that Station, in which time he took some Boats
of Provision going to furnish the Army, making others
run on Shore, by which the Camp begun to feel some
scarcity. With the Ships he had tane he presently came
into Dio, with the Moors hang'd at the Yard-arms,
torturing infinitely the Camp by so sad a spectacle.
Rumecaon offered two and thirty thousand Pardaos
for the Ianizary Captain,Dom Alvaro refuseth to release a Ianizary, and commands to hang him up. who (as we have said) was
of Kin to him; but Dom Alvaro commanded he should
be hang'd, saying, he came not thither to Sell, but spill
Blood, and that by the Moors he would get nothing
but their Heads. Rumecaon was scar'd with his anger,
the Turks with his contempt. Dom Alvaro, not to let
his Souldiers Swords rust in the Scabbard, till there was
a time of Action, sent forth some Ships of Bacaim and
Chaul, to take the little Vessels which furnish't the
Enemy,Our men take fourteen Barks from the Enemy. which succeeded so happily as they took fourteen,
bringing them in with the Moors hung at the
Yards, which was now less resented then trembled at,
seeing our anger and vengeance had neither Limits or
Compassion.
         
            
180. Dom Iohn de Castro, in the mean time, resolving
with himself to Chastise the King of Cambaya, by
whose example the Princes of Asia would Live in peace
and reverence of the State, desir'd first to sound and try
others mens judgments, that by their approving the
design, he might find 'em more forward in the Execution
of their own Councels;The Governour in Councel declares his resolution of going to Dio. for this he call'd before
him the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of the
City, with the Gentlemen and Souldiers of Eminency,
to whom he declar'd his Resolution to go in Person to
raise the Siege of Dio, and to Fight Rumecaon in his
own Quarters; that though all knew it; in their particulars,
he had a mind to tell it 'em in common, that in
the approbation of the Common-wealth, he might
carry with him the Justice of the cause as part of the
Victory. Upon hearing the Governour, every one was
affected, in the first place with his Modesty, that subjected
an Independent Minister; then his great Zeal,
that upon the yet reaking Blood of his Children, sacrifis'd
his own Life for the Service of his Country.
Upon giving their Votes in the business, their discourse
was various; Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire, Commander
in Chief in Goa, whose experience was, by his Years
and the chances of Warr, enlarg'd, did thus deliver his
Opinion.
         181. The small force we now have,Dom Diogo de Almeyda's opinion to the contrary. is by their ignorance
of it formidable to our Enemies, all Asia reputing
our strength, more by our Victories, then our
Souldiers, so that the Fame only of what is past,
keeps us up at present. Your Excellency hath in this
Fleet brought together all the Power of India, in
which we can hardly reckon two thousand Portuguese,
and with so little Noise we design to fright the whole
World. This Tree of the State (on whose Branches
hang so many Trophies gain'd in the East) hath its
Roots by infinite Leagues sever'd from its Body; its
best way of preserving 'em, is by being underprop't,
with Peace with some, and Awe from others. We

can never perform what is expected from our joyn'd
Forces, for one Victory will add but little to our
Reputation, and only one loss Destroys us. We have
already Reliev'd our Fortress, and to what end on a
Wound already Cur'd, to spend the Medicine which
is to serve for others? what new Prudence teaches
us in one only Fight to venture what hath been got
by so many Victories? we have an Army sufficient
as we are to maintain us so, not strength when we are
lost to repair us. No great Souldier without necessity
ever gave a Field-battail, for where on both
sides the loss useth to be equal, the Conquerour
only keeps the Field and a useless Glory. At Dio we
neither covet, or can possess any thing but the Fortress;
with what blind Madness go we then to purchase
that with our Blood which is our own already?
what new Colonies have we to Plant the Island? from
what part of the World can we bring others who
are not Moors or Pagans, as fickle in their Loyalty to
the State, as those who now oppose us? We go to
Fight Turks and Moors, exceeding us in Numbers,
equal in Arms, and Discipline; if we have the worst
of it, we have no place to save our selves in, for the
Country is theirs; if we have the better on't, no advantage
will come of the Victory. We have with our
Fleets Conquer'd India, with them must we keep it,
having the advantage of Vessels and Mariners. If we
look for Victory only in Fights, lets slight our Garrisons,
and dismantle our Cities; if 'tis told me, 'tis for
the States honour, to destroy a Kingdome for an
affront, if all who have ta'ne Arms against us, had
receiv'd strict Punishment, the East had been already
unpeopled. Shall we blame Affonso de Albuquer que for
not Burning Ormus, after so many Hostilities and
Treacheries of its Kings and Governours? shall he
forfeit the great Name he atchiev'd there, because for
the Affronts and Quarrels of the Samorim, he destroy'd
not Malabar? shall Nuno de Cunha stain that

Renown'd fame for not making Warr upon Cambaya,
after the Treason of Badur? shall we set upon Destroying
the Turk for his Bashaw's daring to Besiege
our Fortress? shall we set out our Fleets against
Achem, because he hath so often invaded us in Malaca?
shall we put to Fire and Sword Hidalcaon, for
his taking every day our Provisions, and infesting our
Lands of Bardes and Salsete? what despair drives us
to offer the innocent States throat to the Enemies
knife. This Fleet, so terrible in appearance, so weak
in effect, is a bridle to Rumecaon, to Ours a Defence;
but upon Landing so few Souldiers, the East will see
into the secret of our Forces, and all the Princes
endeavour to break down those weak Prisons in which
we keep 'em Fettered. Quintus Fabius Maximus's
winning many Battails was the glory of the Roman
Empire, his avoiding one was its preservation. The
first Conquerours built us a House, we have nothing
to do but to keep it. If by storming Dio the Enemy
have lost an Army, what wants that action of Victory?
what of Punishment? Offence is undertaken
with equal strength, Vengeance with farr greater;
for to get satisfaction for one Affront, we are not to
venture a fresh injury, the rather, because Fortune
is in nothing so absolute as in the chances of Warr.
Victories are many times gotten by light accidents,
and lost by others. Will it be then just to put to the
Contingency of Success the Scepter of the East,
founded, with the dread and envy of Nations, upon
so many Victories? If we lose this Fleet in which is
amas'd together the whole strength of India, what
Treasures hath his Majesty laid up to set forth an
other? we shall begin again, to Petition, or Conquer
the Princes of India; we shall bring back to its Infancy
this Empire now grown Old; we shall Live on
the Courtesie of those Crowns we have provok't,
remaining their miserable Vassals, of whom we were
once Masters.
         
         
            
182. Dom Diogo de Almeyda's Reasons satisfied those
of his own Opinion,The Governours answer. mov'd those of the contrary; yet
Dom Iohn de Castro, secure in the Resolution he had
taken, thus Discourst against 'em. That no ruling
Nation was content with a defensive Warr amongst
her Inferiours; that the State had made her self in
the East Arbiter of Peace and Warr, most of the
Princes of Asia coveting under our shelter to Live
secure; that all the Forts we had in India were to
be maintain'd by the same Arms which wonn 'em;
that the respect, the Moors and Pagans had for us,
would last no longer then they knew we could put
up an Injury; that all those Princes stood looking on
our Punishing Cambaya, and durst not yet with their
Auxiliaries come in to its Relief out of fear to be
crusht in its Ruins; yet if they saw us contented to
make up the ruins of our Fortress, and bind up the
Wounds they have opened, they would come again
to uncover 'em, and aim the second blow at the heart
of the State; that Reputation was the Soul of Empires;
Patience in particulars a Virtue, in Crowns a
Ruine; that we had in this Siege lost so many gallant
Gentlemen, so many Cavalliers and Souldiers of Honour,
as the Wounds they receiv'd would cover with
Infamy the Surviving, if they saw 'em not Reveng'd;
what account could we give the World of this Siege,
but of our patience in enduring it; that the State
by Fame more preserv'd her self, then with all the
Spices of the East; which were only a valuable Commodity
when we got 'em, not by Commerce, but by
Tribute, That, to conclude, he would not suffer
the first weakness of our Arms to happen in Dom
Iohn de Castro's time; that he was resolv'd to Fight,
the Blame should be solely his, every one should
have a share in the Victory. The Governour out of
hopes of Success, or heighth of Courage, spoke
these words with a Spirit presaging his fore-seen Triumph.
         
            
183. The Arms in Dio vvere not idle, for neither
did the losses receiv'd, or our hopes of relief, fright
stout and resolute Rumecaon; He knew the strength the
Governour would bring in Person, (greater in report
then appearance 'twould be) yet did not for that unbend
his resolution of carrying on the Siege, and expecting
the worst of Fortune. He commanded his
men to under-mine the Watch-tower over the gate,Rumecaon begins an other Mine,
where Antonio Freire had his Post; and though they
work't with most profound silence, by diverse Stratagems
diverting our attention, the Commander in chief
(whom no Casualty, or Accident took unprovided)
found out their work, which as at other times he prevented.
The Moors on the 10th. of October play'd the
Mine, which sprung without any hurt on the outward
face of the Wall;which he plays without any loss to us. the Fire giving back by the resistance
of our Counter-forts, and the Moors saw within
a new Wall rais'd, wondering at our fore-sight of all
their designs, and that neither strength, or industry
profitted 'em against so stout and cautious Enemies.
Though Rumecaon found by Experience there was less
Fruit then Labour in the Mines, yet to weary out our
men, or keep his own in good Discipline, he began to
open others, which too being known, were prevented,
of which we speak nothing, because they had no memorable
effect, and to avoid the tediousness things so alike
have in their Relation.
      
      
         
         THE LIFE OF
DOM IOHN DE CASTRO.
         The Third BOOK.
         1. DOM Iohn de Castro, (on the seventeenth
of October of the Year one
thousand five hundred forty and six)
delivering up the Government of the
City to the Bishop,The Governour parts for Dio. Dom Iohn de
Albuquerque, and Dom Diogo de Almeyda
Freire, set Sail directly for Bacaim, where he
design'd to expect other Recruits and Provisions, which
were not yet arriv'd, making it a point of honour that
the Governour of India should not be one day Besieg'd
in Dio, but with Caesar's Fortune, Come, See, and Overcome.
         
            71.
            Eys vem despois o pay, que as ondas corta
            Co restante da gente Lusitana
            E con forca e saber, que mais importa
            Batalha da felice & soberana
            Huns paredes subirodo escusaon portas
            Outros a abrem, na fera esquadra insana
            Feytos faraon tan dignos de memoria
            Que naon caibaon em verso, ou larga Historia.
         
         
            72.
            Este depois en Campo se apresenta
            Vencedor forte e intrepido ao possante
            Rey da Cambaya e a vista che amedrente
            Da fera multidaon quadrupedante.
         
         Cam. St. 71, 72. Can. 10.
         
            
            71.
            Lo, now the Father follows with full Sail,
            And the remainder of the Lusian force,
            He with strong hand, and head of more avail
            Gives a brave lucky Battail to the Moors,
            Where no way is he makes one with his Flail,
            And where there is the Rampiers are his doors;
            Such that days fets, so terrible the blows,
            They will not stand in Verse, nor lye in Prose.
         
         
            72.
            Then lo, he to he great Camlayan King
            Presents himself a Victo in the Field,
            Pale fear into the face of him doth fling,
            And of his furious Horse, which ground shall yield.
         
         Sir Richard Fan. Transtlation.
         2. The Fleet consisted of twelve Gallions,The Fleet and Commanders. of which
the Admiral was the Saint Denis, on which went the
Governour, the rest were Commanded by Garcia de Sa,
Iorge Cabral, Dom Manoel de Silveyra, Manoel de Sousa de
Seputueda, Iorge de Sousa, Iohn Falcaon, Dom Iohn Manoel
Alabastro,John de Barro'; Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Lewis Alvarez de Sousa. The Vessels
with Oars were sixty, of which the chief Commanders
were Dom Manoel de Lima, Dom Antonio de Noronha,
Miguel da Cunha, Dom Diogo de Sottomajor, the Secretary
Antonio Corneiro, Alvaro Perez de Andrade, Dom Manoel
D??ca, Iorge da Sylva, Luis Figuera, Ieronymo de Sousa,
Nun, Fernandez Pegado Ramatho, Lourenco Riberio,
Antonio Leme, Alvaro Serraon, Cosme Fernandez, Manoel
Lobo, Francisco de Azevedo, Pero de Attayde Inferno,
Francisco da Cunha, Antonio de Sa Native of Romania,
Vasco Fernandez Captain of Goa, and Commander of
fifteen Fly-boats, Barks, and other Vessels, on which
went the Canarins brought up in Goa, and in company
other Ships of Cananor and Cochim.
         3. The Governour in six days come to an Anchor at
Bacaim,Arrives at Bacaim where Dom Ieronymo de Menezes, his Brother-in-law,
and Commander of that Fortress, came to him
on Board, comforting one the other, in the loss of a
Brother and a Son. The Governour unwilling his Arms
should want employment, sent forth with six light
Ships Dom Manoel de Lima, to take, in the Bay of Cambaya,
some of those Vessels which Recruit, and Victual

the Enemies Camp. He there ply'd for some days to and
again, in which he took sixty Vessels of Provision from
the Moors, whose Bodies he ordered to be mangled, and
towing em, put'em to Float in the mouth of the Rivers,
for the Current to carry'em to the Island, where
they might be seen with horrour and amasement of
the incenst Portuguese, inventing every day new Cruelties.
Dom Manoel, when his Commission was expir'd,
came in, with threescore Moors hanging at the Yardsarms,
a sight which sacrifis'd more to Vengeance then
Humanity. The Governour, rejoycing at those Preludiums
of the Warr he had undertaken, sent Dom Manoel
de Lima out again with thirty Ships, and Orders to put
to Fire and Sword all the Coast of Cambaya, that the
memory of their Punishment might be Recorded in
their Ruins.
         4. Lourenco Pirez de Tavora Commander of the
Ships which came from the Kingdome (as hath been
said before) put in,Lourenc Pirez goes after him, with most of the Ships of his
Squadron, at Cochim, there hearing the news of the
Siege, he immediately parted for Goa, believing he
should find the Governour on Shore; and upon knowledge
of his being parted with the whole Fleet, set Sail
directly for Dio, preferring the King's Service to the
advantages of his Voyage. His example was follow'd
by most of the Gentlemen who came that year from
the Kingdome, the ruins of our Fortress being the first
place they Landed at in India; Amongst whom was
Dom Antonio de Noronha,and other Gentlemen, (Son of the Vice-King Dom
Garcia) with threescore Souldiers at his own charges:
these were the Riches the Gentlemen of those times
came for, to the East; wounds being then more prisable
Commodities then now Diamonds. The Governour
by those Ships receiv'd Letters from the Infante
Dom Lewis, whose Copies we will put down, to shew
the King's and Infant's attention to the least actions of
Ministers, (forming a true judgment of 'em, by Rewards,
or Punishments, to be even with 'em) and the

simplicity of the stile, so free from the humour and
height of other times; whose Memory to the Lovers
of that Age will not be tedious.
         
            The Infante Dom Lewis's Letter.
            5. HOnourable Governour. By your Letters to
my Lord the King, and my self, I have seen
an account of your Voyage from your parting from
Mocambique till your arrival in India, and what you did
there till the departure of the Ships; the condition
you found the Country in, the quality of the Persons,
the Licentiousness of Trade, the weakness of the
Fleet; how you behav'd your self to Hidalcaon in the
business of Meale; how in the affairs at Ormus; and
how to those Gentlemen, who were permitted by
Martin Affonso to carry thither Commodities; and
what more you said in those Letters; and because my
Lord the King answers all those things particularly,
I will not do the same but in short. Yet cannot I
forbear telling you, how I was here on Shore frighted
at the danger you scap't about the Island Comaro;
'twas seriously a great and wonderfull fortune, and
which I take as a good Omen, it seeming to me, God
in that would shew you he was to preserve you in the
difficulties of India, for which no less a miracle is
necessary, then that shew'd you in your scaping so
eminent a danger, for which I have given hearty
thanks and am glad to hear Dom Ieronimo de Noronha
bore you Company in it, since God hath likewise preserv'd
him, and 'tis for a man of his honour to share
in the extremities and troubles of his General. As
to the other things you write me, My Lord the King's
answer being particular, and I present at the dispatches,
'twere I think too precise to write 'em to you
over again; for by his Letters you'l see his satisfaction,

in the way you design in those parts for his
Service, and in the good opinion the Country hath of
you, which he particularly commends to your care
in all businesses; what in that I have more to tell
you, is, that I'me very much satisfy'd with your management
of affairs in that place, and with your
words as well as actions, for by those 'tis seen the
crossing so many Climates hath not altered you from
your self, or my constant opinion, which, you are not
content in shewing, by your actions, but your words
are a pledge you will continue doing the same, of
which I'me very well assur'd, that what by humane
power can be compast you will truly perform. His
Majesty is not less satisfy'd with your manner of writing,
for your Letters came well digested, they contain'd
nothing superfluous, and by 'em is sufficiently
seen what I said before, that you both know what
you are to do, and have a desire and earnestness to do
it, without any temporary respect of interest or
affection, which I not a little rejoyce at to hear from
you; for though I am sure of your actions, 'tis yet a
sign of the great abundance of your heart and
virtue, your coveting to say so, which makes me confident
God will perfect all your good desires, and
bring you out of that Country, to your great satisfaction
and honour, for he cannot be unsuccessfull
who designs nothing but the service of God and his
King; and though that is to be purchas'd with no
ordinary difficulty, let me mind you, that 'tis there
resides merit, and that Our Saviour Christ was by
that to enter into his Glory; and if things appear
to you above your Mastery, remember, 'tis there God
puts in his helping hand, and seconds those who serve
him with your attention; and that men of themselves
can furnish nothing but will and diligence,
which made Saint Paul attribute to himself nothing
but the planting, because God is to give the increase,
as he will give it to all those undertakings you plant

with that zeal, I'me secure you have in all your
actions; therefore be not frighted at great things, or
slight little, poise equally, and remit the end to God
Almighty; and though some things succeed not as
you desire, be not transported by despair, while you
act with a just zeal, and clear intention, because God
often permits his servants to commit errors, thereby
to merit by their patience and trust in him, and for
the increase of their experience and perfection; do
justice according to your Conviction, always taking,
as you use, counsel and advice in business; preserve
your self in that clearness you practice in the temporal
injoyments, and advantages of that Country, then
happen what will, all will tend to a good end. Be
very exact in what relates to Divine worship for the
Conversion of the Infidels, for that's the Armory
must chiefly defend India. Endeavour to Banish
thence men's extravagant expences, the Effeminateness
and Luxury they Live in, and the excess of
Cloaths and Furniture, disposing them to't mildly,
and winningly, by your own and your Sons example;
and by Countenancing and Favouring those whose
practice is contrary; and if those things be above
your reforming let it not trouble you, because the
corruptions of time, must by time have their amendment,
and cannot be remedy'd on a suddain; continue
therefore your good intention, managing things
according to the disposition of the time and persons
you have to do with, so, I hope in God, he will (as
you desire) direct all things, to his, and my Lord the
King's service and your honour. For your request,
of my solliciting your stay there may be short, I perceive
you have no little reason for your desire, but
my opinion is, it cannot be set upon till seeing your
Letters, which God willing we shall receive this year,
I therefore deferr answering that point till the next
year. I have spoke to the King in the business you writ
me about your Son Dom Alvaro, his Majesty knows

him well, and is well inform'd of the qualities of his
Person, and desires to honour and favour him, yet
for some reasons his Majesty hath commanded to be
writ you; and as himself writes, that this year he signs
no Grants, he hath thought fit not to answer that
till the next; in the mean time, he hath sent
Commands for conferring on him that honour, you 'l
find in his Letters Patent. I' me very carefull of putting
him in mind of all that concerns your Sons, and
hope in God 'twill be so ordered, that you shall receive
from his Majesty honour and reward, as also
your Sons, whom he desires to use according to your
Deservings; and you may be confident his Majesty
very well knows your will to serve him, and is very
much satisfy'd with your way of doing it hitherto. I
spoke to his Majesty about Affonso de Rojas, and on
your consideration he immediately granted, what I
ask't him, but (as I said) because he tells those
who go to the Indies that this year he signs no Grants,
he hath diferr'd Affonso de Rojas business till the next,
and saith, he will then reward him. I'le take care by
the grace of God, to send you the Letters Patent, and
am very glad of the good News you tell me of Affonso
de Rojas, and am apt to believe, that being Mr. Olmedo's
Brother, and in our Company, he must prove
an honest man. What you sent me on the Ships
which came, was delivered me, I was very glad of it,
and value it as coming from your hands.
            
            
               Almeirim the
twenty sixth of March 1547.
               
               The Infante Dom Lewis.
            
         
         6. Dom Manoel de Lima setting Sail from Bacaim went
by Night into the River of Surat,The hurt Dom Manoel doth about Surat. and getting up with
the Tide came in sight of a great Village, which, though
not Inhabited by the Abissines, had its name from 'em;
the Village was on the East side of the River, spread on
a great Plain??? and, though in an open place, had

two thousand Families,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 9. defended (without any other
Fortification) only by some Trenches, on confidence
perhaps of their first beginning the VVarr, and the
strength of that Army they had in the Field. Dom Manoel
went on shore, and our men, in the same order they
Landed, fell upon the Enemy with more Courage then
Discipline. The Moors were stout enough to expect,
not to resist, less scar'd by their apprehension of our
men, then the horrour of their own who first fell;
whose Blood so frighted 'em, as they turn'd their backs.
Many were cut off in the Flight, few in Resistance; the
Slaughter was great, the Souldiers Sword sparing neither
Sex or Age. Dom Manoel commanded his men to
Fire the Houses, burning together Town and Estates;
Covetousness was below their fury; only one Moor
had his Hands ordered to be cut off, who was left Alive
not to carry the News without signs of Victory.
         7. The Fleet went out of the River,He destroys the City of Antote, and Coasting
along two days came in sight of the City of Antote,
famous for its proud Buildings, and rich Inhabitants,
whom their commerce by Sea had well enrich't;
these, warn'd by others sufferings, resolv'd to Defend
their Houses, or Dye in 'em, valuing so equally their
Lives and Fortunes. Dom Manoel got on Shore, though
not without loss; for the Moors waited for us, showing
themselves Souldiers in their Resolution, not in their
Conduct, who charg'd us divided into Companies, with
wandring and uncertain Shot, betraying the same fear
in their Resistance, they did afterwards in their Flight.
Dom Manoel got ground of 'em, till he forc't 'em into
the City, where, at the sight of Women and Children,
they were made stand by their Compassion; here our
men thought they had to do with Enemies, for they
fought, with the Bowels of Fathers, Cowards in defending
their own, stout in protecting the Lives of others;
but their Courage not being natural, and proceeding
from tender or timerous affections, their compassion
yielded to their fear, which gave us possession of the

City, Children, and Victory; and Dom Manoel, more
designing Ruine then Conquest, gave up the City to
the Flames. The cruelty out-went the destruction, for
many Bramenish young Ladies, exempted from crime by
their Sex, from the Sword by their faces, in Colour and
Beauty not inferiour to those of our Europe, were not
spar'd in the Victory.
         8. Dom Manoel de Lima went Coasting all the Bay of
Cambaya, destroying the Towns,And other places, and retires. so depopulating every
place, as to seem not to be glutted, with Blood or Victory;
at last retires with more Glory then Booty, and
found the Governour with all the Fleet together at the
Island Dos Mortos, the next day (the sixth of November)
they set Sail for Dio, the Ships went light, and
with the multitude of Pendants and Streamers, made a
pleasant and beautifull sight.
         9. At the Fortresses making the Fleet,The Governour arrives at Dio. such was the
general satisfaction, as of men who after such a deluge
of Blood, saw those who brought 'em Peace in Victory;
the Fortress was round about full of Colours, the raz'd
Ruins putting on contentment. The Commander in
chief gave order for Shooting off all the Guns; answer'd
by the Governour from Sea with an amazing
Vollee, seconded by Instruments of Warr and Musick,
solemnizing so frightfull a day with chearfull Vespers,
the Moors too discharg'd a great many Pieces, shewing
their joy or contempt for the Governours arrival.
         10. Dom Iohn de Castro kept that Night at Sea,He holds a Council at Sea. and
sent for on Board, the Commander in chief, Garcia de
Sa, Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, Iorge Cabral, and
other Gentlemen of the Councel, whom he acquainted
with the resolution he came with, to Fight the Enemy,
upon which he ask't no mans Opinion, because the
Governour of India drew not his Sword to Defend but
Chastise, but in what manner he should fall upon the
Enemy, he desir'd all their Counsels; Garcia de Sa, with
such reasons, approv'd, and prais'd his fix't Resolution,
as for his Person, and their weight were very taking

with the Governour. They discourst about the way of
Fighting, and concluded of it, which was a secret till
the Execution. 'Twas ordered the men should in the
silence of the Night, be put into the Fortress; and on
their Landing, Musick, Trumpets, and Shooting from
the Ships should keep the design from Rumecaon. The
men in three Nights by Ladders of Cords got into the
Fortress; which was done with so much Caution, as
not to be discovered by the Enemy.
         11. Rumecaon,
                discourse. on the approaching danger shewing
himself most Resolute, told his Souldiers, if the Governour
resolv'd to come out and Fight in the Field, the
Moors would march into the Fortress through the Gates,
not over the Walls; that he hop't with the Portuguese
Colours to sweep the House of their Prophet; that
they fought for the Liberty of so many Princes, who
sigh't under the heavy Oppression of Tribute, and Servitude;
that they should reserve their Courage, in one
day to revenge the Injuries of so many Years; that the
State was crush't under the weight of so many Victories;
that Fortune had so ordered it, to bring 'em together,
at one Blow to cut 'em off.The number of his Army. The Turk heightned
this insolence, by Commanding all the Souldiers should
have double Pay; his Army was of above forty thousand
men, most of the Officers, Turks, old Souldiers,
famous by the report of their Courage, brought thither
by extraordinary Pay. There were come lately to the
Camp seven hundred Ianizaries, who proudly desir'd
to Fight by themselves, that the Moors might see who
gave 'em the Victory. Rumecaon supply'd the Posts, and
plac't the main Body of his Army,His ordering 'em. so as to attend that
place where he thought our Fleet would Anchor; neither
did his Confidence disturb his Discipline. Thus
expected he to be falln upon by us, ready for Defence,
doubtfull of Success.
         12. The Governour having now got all the Souldiers
into the Fortress, found diverse Opinions about
falling on the Enemy, and all the Arguments striking on

the Contingency of Success, they could not be approv'd
or rejected, without the knowledge of what's to come,
known to no body. Garcia de Sa, by the Authority of
his Years Courage and Birth, discourst again about the
conveniency of Fighting; but Dom Iohn de Castro
commanding silence said,The Governour resolves to Fight. that the Lot was already
cast, that by the Valiant he should be well thought of,
and from Cowards he car'd not for approbation; that
those without should expect the success to give their
judgments. He spent that Evening in disposing the
Souldiers for the next day, not to alter by delay their
Courage or Resolution;His orders to??? the Fleet. He gave order the Fleets
Boats should for a sign expect three Roquets to be
fir'd from the Fortress, and, at the same time our men
resolv'd to Sally forth, Row toward that place of the
Enemy which was most Obnoxious, with Drums and
Trumpets sounding, crediting what they could their
intentions of Landing,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. covering the entrance of the
Boats with Lances, which would make the Stratagem
probable, and that the Governours Boat should, by its
place, Flagg Royal, and Adornments, be known at a
distance; a Stratagem, which either gave, or furthered
our Victory.
         13. The day broke, which began the eleventh of
November, Dedicated to the memory of the glorious
Saint Martin, Bishop of Tours, who might, as a Saint
favour, as a Souldier fight for us. The Governour, with
the first Light, came with his Generals staff on the platform
of the Fortress, his white Armour added so much
to his Majesty, as his Charge was respected in his Person;
Mass was said at an open Altar, that they might
begg Victory of the God of Hoasts; the Governour
and Major part of the Souldiers receiv'd the Sacrament,
and the Guardian of the Franciscans proclam'd
a Plenary indulgence to all those who Dy'd in the Battail;
when this was done, he commanded the pulling
down the gates of the Fortress, and the Dressing breakfast
for the Souldiers with 'em, that the Generals confidence

and the despair of any shelter, might equally
assist the Victory, making them stand to't out of glory,
or necessity; He thus spake to the Souldiers.His Speech to the Souldiers. 
            We
are going now to a Battail, in which, if Conquer'd,
we shall honour our God with our Lives, if Conquerours,
our King with our Victory; The strength
of the Enemies Army, is Turks and Ianizaries, who
like Souldiers of fortune desire Warr, hate Fighting;
the other part consists of diverse Nations, brought
into one Body by their Pay, but not to be forc't by
it, to be all unanimous. These are not stouter then
their Fathers, and Ancestors, there's no reason they
should be more Fortunate, all of 'em have by our
Arms been Mastered??? This Empire of Asia is the
Child of our Victories, we have Nurst it in its first
Cradle, let's, now 'tis grown up, maintain it, that
after long succession of time??? it may point to the
World the glory of this Action; for me to encourage
you to Fight, were to forget my self we were Portuguese.
         
         14. The order he put his men in,The order he put 'em in. was this, he gave
the Van-guard to Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, he claiming
the greatest danger in recompence of his former; He
had five hundred Portuguese, six hundred Canarins, and
five hundred
               The people of Malabar is divided into Nobility call'd Naires, and into Commolty, call'd Poleas, 'twixt whom the difference and distinction is so great, as if a Naire be but by chance touch't by a Polca, he is bound by certain ceremonies to cleanse himself from that Contagion; The Naires have their Women in common, being bound from Marriage to be always ready to follow the Samorim, (i. e.) Emperour to the Warrs, without the partial concernment of Wives and Children; their Heirs are their Brothers or Sisters children; they must be of descent, the Emperour not having the power to make one; their Temperance is admirable, as is their Courage in incountring dangers or difficulties.
               The Poeas are Tradesmen, and so bound to one Trade, as it is of necessity entail'd on the Family; a Carpenters Son cannot be a Taylor, nor a Taylor a Carpenter; They are too Slaves and Labourers to the Naires; if any women Naire mingles with a Polea she is counted Damn'd, and immediately put to Death. See Barro's History of India, Dec. 1. Lib. 9. Cap. 3.
             Naires. Dom Alvaro de Castro commanded
five hundred Portuguese more, part of whom were
the Gentlemen, and Offiers of his Fleet. Dom Manoel
de Lima had five hundred more; the Governour had the
greatest Body, which was of about eight hundred Portuguese,
with some Canarins, and Malabareses.
         
            
            37.
            Dous modos ha de gente, porque a nobre
            Naires chamados saon, et a menos digna
            Poleas tem por nome, aquem obriga
            A ley naon mesturar a casta antiga.
         
         
            38.
            Porque os que usaraon sempre hum mesmo officio
            De outro naon podem receber consorte
            Nem os filhos teraon outro exercicio
            Se naon o de seus passados ate morte
            Para os Naires he certo grande vicio
            D' estes serem tocados, de tal sorte
            Que quando algum se toca per ventura
            Com ceremonias mil, se alimpa et apura???
         
         
            39.
            Dest a arte o Iudaico povo antigo
            Naon tocava na gente de Samaria
            Mais estranhezas inda do que digo
            N'est a terra vereys de usancavaria
            Os Naires sos saon dados ao perigo
            D' as armas sos defemdem da contraria
            Banda o seu Rey, trazendo sempre usada
            Na esquerda adarga, et na dereita espada.
         
         
            40.
            Bramenes saon os seus Religiosos
            Nome antiguo, et de grande preminencia
            Observaon os preceitos taon famosas
            De hum que premeyro pos nome a sciencia
            Naon mataon cousa viva, et temerosas
            Das carnes tem grandissima abstinencia
            Somente no Venereo ajuntamento
            Tem mas licenca et menos regimento.
         
         
            41.
            Geraes saon as molheres, mas somente
            Para os da geracaon de seus maridos
            Ditosa condicaon ditosa gente
            Que naon saon de ciumes offendidos
            Estes, et outros costumes variamente
            Saon pelos Malavares admittidos
            A terra he gross a em tratta et tudo aquillo
            Que as ondas podem dar da China ao Nilo.
         
         Camo. Can. 7. St. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41.
         
            
            37.
            Two Ranks they have of people, Nobles which
            Are Naires stil'd, and those of base degree
            Call'd Poleas. To both the Law prescribes
            They shall not marry out of their own Tribes.
         
         
            38.
            And those who have been bred up to one Trade,
            Ont of another may not take a Wife;
            Nor may their Children any thing be made
            But what their Parents have been all rheir Life.
            To touch a Naire with their Bodies shade,
            A scandal is to his Prerogative;
            If themselves chance to touch them as they meet,
            With thousand Rites himself he washes sweet.
         
         
            39.
            Just so the Jewish people did of Yore,
            The touch of a Samaritan eschew:
            But, when ye come into the Country, more
            And things of greater strangeness shall ye view.
            The Naires only go to Warr, before
            Their King, they only stand a Rampier true
            Against his foes. A Sword they always wield
            With their right hand, and with the left a Shield.
         
         
            40.
            Their Prelates are call'd Bramens (an Old name
            And (amongst them) of great Preheminence)
            Of his fam'd Sect, who Wisdome did disdain,
            And took a Stile of a more modest sence.
            They kill no Living thing, and highly blame
            All flesh to eat, with wondrous abstinence;
            But other flesh their Law doth not forbid,
            Yet they as prone thereto as if it did.
         
         
            41.
            Their Wives are common, but are so to none
            Save those, who of their Husbands kindred are;
            (O blessed Lot, blest Generation,
            On whom fierce Jealousie doth wage no Warr.)
            These are the Customs, but not these alone
            Which are receiv'd by those of Malabar;
            The Land abounds in Trade of all things, Isle
            Or firm-land yields from China unto Nile.
         
         Sir Ric. Fanshaw's Translation.
         
            
15. The Moors daily encreased the Camp,The Fleet Rows to shore. and very
lately were arriv'd Alucaon and Mojatecaon with five
thousand Souldiers. The Governour commanded the
Signal agreed on, of Firing the Roquets, should be given
the Fleet, which, upon understanding it, betook themselves
Lustily to their Oars, and being close to Shore
discharg'd all their Guns in the Moors quarters. The
smoak for some time hid the Ships, which made the
Enemy fall on, not where the fear was, but where he
apprehended; sollicitous in the imaginary, careless in
the real danger.Rumecaon came there to resist 'em Rumecaon with the main Body of his
Army, charg'd there to hinder our men from Landing.
The Governour at that time, with Scaling Ladders in
readiness to clap to the Wall,The Governour Sallies out of the Fortress. sally'd out of the Fortress.
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas with his men encompast
the Ditch, to get up at that place where Diogo Lopez
de Sequeira's work was. Antonio Moniz Barretto, who
was of this Body,The unfortunate Gallantry of three Souldiers. trusted with his Scaling Ladder three
Valiant Souldiers, whose Blood was the first was spilt
in that Victory they Liv'd not to enjoy. They were
come but that year from the Kingdom, in Lourenco Pirez
de Tavora's Fleet, Natives of the Town of Torraon, and
brought recommendatory Letters to Antonio Moniz
from his Mother, which they deliver'd as they were
going to engage; He joyfully receiv'd 'em, telling the
Souldiers, if they came off Alive, he would do 'em good
Offices with the Governour; to which they unanimously
reply'd, that, only for that day they needed his
favour; that their Carriage should cut out their passage
for the future; that they begg'd him to trust 'em with
the Scaling Ladder, and be confident, they would
Plant,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. and Defend it, with their Lives. Antonio Moniz
seeing in such ordinary Souldiers such extraordinary
Gallantry, confidently delivered it 'em, saying, he
trusted 'em, with the Ladder, and his Honour; and as
soon as with unfortunate Courage they had planted it,
a shot at randome took off their Heads.
         16. Ile here give the Story of a strange Challenge,A strange Challenge.
            
which I should pass over were it not as Famous, as
Compassionate. Dom Iohn Manoel, and Iohn Falcaon,
Gentlemen of a great expectance, were for some
sleight Jealousies (which in the Worlds opinion are
heavy, as they are taken) fall'n out, and resolv'd to justifie
their Pique in the Field, making Valour or Chance
judge of their quarrel; The seconds, who engag'd with
less pre-occupy'd judgments, endeavour'd to decide the
quarrel by a more honourable Duel, alledging, the
Governour was ready to engage; that a Challenge always
a Crime, would be now a Scandal; that by the
Edict they would forfeit their Lives; that Dom Iohn
de Castro, was not, though thought so, so indulgent a
Father, he bore with faults, but not with insolences;
that they might salve their Honours, where they ventured
their Lives, by agreeing, that he who first, and
with most Courage scal'd the Enemies Wall, should
have in the particular and common Fight, the clearest
Reputation; so by their Witty courage, inventing how
to Dye with Rewards, and how to Fight Duels without
a Crime, both the Enemies accepted the proposal,
desiring their Kindred, and Friends, to hold their Ladders
as to men who were to Fight for the States and
their own honour; at the same time both began to
climbe. Dom Iohn Manoel laying one hand on the Wall
had it cut off, relieving himself with the other, that too
by a stroak was ta'ne away, and putting his Elbows to't
to secure his hold, his Head was cut off by a Semitar.
Iohn Falcaon at the same instant seis'd on the Wall,
and having mastered it, while he stoutly defended himself
was cut in pieces. The Braves in the Army were of
different opinions, who of these gave greatest marks of
their Courage; in favour of both, wee'l say, he who
gives all for it, owes no more to honour.
         17. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas began with his men to
plant Ladders,How Dom Iohn Mascarenhas behaves himself. many getting up with as much Resolution,
as Fortune, for though receiv'd with Lances,
they o'recome the resistance; these had the honour

to be the first in the Danger of being alone in the
Camp, sustaining the weight of the Moors till their
Companions came to 'em; how those who first scal'd
the Walls behav'd themselves, may be guest by their
posture of Fighting, the Moors fought on firm ground,
Ours suspended in the Air. Dom Alvaro de Castro, and
Dom Manoel de Lima, got over the Wall in several
places, receiving most hurt in the stoutest Resistance;
while they fought scattered, they lost some men, closing
they made more room for the getting up of their Souldiers.
         18. The Governour in the plain Field, met with
greater Danger,The danger the Governour was in on the Bridge. then there was in Scaling; for he
march't toward the Bridge, defended by a great Body
of men, and great Pieces planted on it, the importance
of gaining it equal'd the danger. The Governour
eminently hazarded himself in falling on, his Courage
was singular, his Fortune miraculous; for the Moors
often put their match to the prim'd Guns, and not one
took Fire, a success, by the Miracle opportune,His miraculous deliverance. by the
Accident unusual, yet would not Heaven have the
whole Victory, for the coming of the Turks in greater
numbers to the defence of the Bridge, with Musquets,
Granados, and Pikes, stop't the fury of our Souldiers,
some turn'd their backs to the Bullets, God perhaps,
by that, shewing us, what we are when left to our selves;
the Cowards fled, the Valiant stood to't; Dom Iohn de
Castro, below none in Courage, above all in Prudence,
with some who follow'd him clos'd with the Enemy,
crying aloud, Victory,He crys out Victory, the Turks run away: This noise
was spread with so happy Ecchos, as our men once more
Rally'd, and came to their Colours; the Turks fearfull,
or Credulous, left the Field, this shout of the Generals
being the gate of Victory. Our men did here the Execution
of Conquerours, and now that past for truth,
what was before stratagem. The Governour pursuing
his Fortune, went up and down the Field, and, as Victory
is exempt from Rashness, and Fear without Counscel,

Dom Iohn surrounded almost with the Enemies
whole Army, cry'd out Victory, and the Moors run away,
without loss,and pursues it. but out of order: In fine, we had
by him before the Battail the Victory; Those who engag'd
with the Governour unanimously affirm, that he
was the first got upon the Wall, and none but himself
contradicted this testimony, who freely said, Lourenco
Pirez de Tavora clim'd first;What he saith of Lourenco Pirez. slighting repute so weakly
proud, and desiring to be excus'd from stealing honour,
he knew so well how to purchase.
         19. Rumecaon, upon advice of his mens disorderly
Flight, came in with a Body of Turks, to stop, or interrupt
the Victory; and retarding the fury of our Souldiers
by the advantage of his Numbers, pois'd the Battail.
The obstinacy of the dispute lasted some time; The
Standard Royal was twice shot down, at which sight
the Governour impatiently cry'd out, what means this
Portuguese? shall they take out of your hands the Victory?
shall they carry off the Standard?The Gonour fights in Person. and charging
the Enemy under cover of a Buckler which had sticking
in it two Arrows, with words and actions so encourag'd
the Souldiers, as with their fury, to make the
Moors give ground, and the last fly, by the fright of the
first.
         20. Dom Alvaro de Castro, and Dom Manoel de Lima
being joyn'd, rais'd the envy of their Souldiers and
Enemies; they charg'd Alucaon, and Mojatecaon, Valiant
Turks, and the Chief Commanders of the Army, who,
for no little time, made the Victory doubtfull; The
blood Dy'd the Arms, Dy'd the ground, the rude noise
of the Moors, did like a fresh danger fright the Camp,
the horrour and confusion so mastered the Senses, as
many before feeling their Wounds, felt themselves Dying.
Number at last yielded to Courage, and the Turks
with infinite loss quitted their ground. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
charg'd Iuzarcaon,Rumecaon Rallies in the plain Field. whose Post he gain'd, not
with less Valour, or worse Fortune. Rumecaon, without
losing his Courage or Judgment by the first loss, expected

the second, forming his Squadrons in the open
Field, out of necessity, or confidence, for in so numerous
an Army the fright was more predominant then the
loss; and as in extremities 'tis usual to accuse Fortune,
Rumecaon in the hearing of our men, with superstitious
Crys and Noises made his Atonements, as if so to appease
the indignation of the Heavens.
         21. Dom Iohn de Castro,The Governour and his Son fall on him. unwilling to lose one moment
of so glorious a Day, joyn'd his small Army, and,
giving the Van-guard to his Son Dom Alvaro, fac't the
Enemy; who resolutely expected him, and putting out
the Horns of the Half-moon in which he was form'd,
came begirting our Infantry; yet Dom Alvaro, as if he
would have to himself the glory of that Day, fell upon
the Enemy with so much Gallantry, as he was the first
of his men who Wounded the Moors, charging or
opening with his Sword and Buckler a close Squadron.
The Enemy in the first charge maintain'd the Field,Dom Alvaro breaks him. afterwards
unable to endure the weight of the Battail,
retir'd in Disorder; our men Routing the disordered
Ranks, rather chas'd, then Destroy'd the flying Enemy.
Here the Victory began to be notorious; but Rumecaon
with a great Batallion of Moors, and Ianizaries,
made Head against our men, who spread upon the pursute,
neglected or not minded Discipline.
         22. Here was Dom Alvaro given for lost,The danger and resoluteness of Dom Alvaro. for his
scattered Souldiers, unable to make any Resistance,
march't off, leaving the Enemy the Camp, and Victory;
nor were his Perswasions, or resolute Fighting, of force
enough to Retain some, or Rally others, on so sleight
accidents depends the fortune of Warr. Antonio Casal
a Friar,Fre. Antonio Casal plants a Crucifix. (whose Religious courage is by Authors recorded)
with a Crucifix lifted up, by pious, and moving
Arguments, began to rebuke and animate our men,
shewing 'em the Image of Christ expos'd again on the
Cross to second injuries, it hapned that a Stone cast at
randome, so unnail'd an arm of the Crucifix as to leave
it hanging, the holy Figure shewing it self in the same

prospective, inclin'd to the Believers,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. falln to the Infidels; Our men more animated by Heavens then the
States injuries, shew'd in a different cause, different
Courage, more engag'd by the Outrages offer'd their
Creator,Our men are encouraged. then by the fevere Commands of their Monarck.
On a suddain they all Rally'd, and recovering
strength, were rather Instruments then Authors of the
Victory. Rumecaon upon the Routing of his men retir'd,
and Dom Alvaro engag'd with him at the same
time entred the City,Rumecaon retires, and Dom Alvaro enters the City. more hindered by those who fell,
then by the resistance of the Living, who did not now
defend themselves.
         23. At that time came up Dom Manoel de Lima,Manoel de Lima joyns him, as
Couragious by Land, as Sea, who, where he was plac't
broke the Enemy, till joyning with Dom Alvaro, and
both entring the City, did bloody Execution on the
Moors, who Routed, and Scattered, strove to save
themselves more by Flight then Resistance, and the
face of Warr look't more like Plunder then Fight, our
men found Moors, not Enemies; many of 'em creeping
into their Houses hid their own Estates, as stoll'n from
the Victory; others cast away their Arms to fly nimbler.
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas,and Dom Iohn Mascarenhas. at an other place entred the
City, ending that day so glorious a Siege.
         24. The Governour fought still in the Camp, sollicitous
for his mens Victory, secure in his own, when
News came to him, that the Town was delivered, but
RumecaonRumecaon offers Battail again. (like a Mine) plaid again, retarding the
Victory, with eight thousand Souldiers, so disposing
himself, as to give or expect Battail, so great were their
Numbers as with the leavings of the Field to manage
a new Warr. About that time Sally'd out of the City,
Dom Alvaro de Castro, Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, and Dom
Manoel de Lima, to joy with the Governour for the
Victory; when they saw Rumecaon in the Field with an
other Army. The Governour, that his suspence might
not be mistook for fear, with the same Courage of the
first, ingag'd in the second Battail, putting his men into

three Squadrons, two fell upon the Enemy in the Flank,
he himself in the Front; this was the order of his
charging the Enemy,The Governour defeats him. who more Desperate then Resolute
receiv'd our first shock, afterwards fought without
Courage or Confidence, and being seconded by his
men with a faint and forc't Obedience, left us on sleight
resistance the Field; though in all the Actions of Siege
and Fight, Rnmecaon shew'd himself no less Souldier
then Valiant; but in adversity, Fame is sooner deserv'd
then purchast.
         25. The Moors opened their Front, the Governour
(like an impetuous River carrying all before it) fell upon
them undefended; now was the Execution without
Fighting, the Moors look't like Enemies by their Flying,
not by their Defence;The Victory gotten. and our men falling upon
some Companies not yet broken, they, as for their advantage
Disordered themselves, flying from one another
with as much, rather more apparent Danger then from
us; others not to pass for Enemies threw away their
Arms, as Instruments which might mind us of their
Offence and our Vengeance; there were in fine, in that
Tragedy acted all those affections fear puts on. RumecaonRumecaon's Death.
seeing all lost, put himself in a poor Garment amongst
the Dead, exempting himself from Rage and Victory;
but a Stone from an unknown hand, by his Death
sav'd his waiting on the Triumph. Many stood to be
the Authors of his Death, as formerly of Galba's, who
had more Murderers then Wounds; and in our own
Age and Kingdome have we seen the like accident.
         26. I purposely omit the particular accidents of this
Battail, because none can be prais'd without injury to
others, wee'l only give a short relation of the Officers,
and most eminent Personages, out of reverence to their
Place, and Quality; besides in the confusion of a Battail
'tis difficult with the exact Rigour of truth to particularize
accidents; and 'tis certain, those whose Pen
finds out the Atoms of the most occult Carriages, endeavour
to help out the History, or are very sharp

sighted in finding out Events. 'Tis enough for knowledge,
that so famous an Action credited then our Arms,
now our Memory, and I believe that of all the designs
in Asia no Siege out-went, or Battail equal'd this.
         27. The numbers of the Enemies Army cannot with
certainty be affirm'd,Diverse opinions of the Enemies numbers. because with different Calculation,
some raise 'em above sixty thousand, others say
less, neither could the Moors who were ta'ne Prisoners,
make any exact judgment of those they lost; but by all
accounts, the disproportion of the Armies was so notorious,
as was sufficient to amase the World with the
report; and in forein Histories we find the Victory
writ with more applause then in our own Memorials;
and if our Country imitated the Roman Empires gratitude
towards her Sons of desert, she would in proud
Statues let the World read Dom Iohn de Castro's actions,
which like Annals of Brass should be publick Volumes
to all Ages; we find not that his Reward was suitable
to his Merit,Congratulating for his Victory. perhaps to raise it, he here met
with the usual misfortune of Heroes, yet enjoy'd he as
a more durable recompence, the glory of his Name.
The Princes of Asia, by ambitious Embassies gave him
the joy of the Victory. The Chamber of Goa call'd
him Duke, either to mind him of it, or to seem to desire
it. The King Dom Iohn honour'd him with the Title of
Vice-King of India, the Fourth the State had there.
The same Earth which covers his Ashes, Buries his other
Rewards, his Posterity only Inheriting the glory of so
great an Ascendent.
         28. The Governour laid aside the King's share of the
Booty, many Colours, and forty Pieces of great Canon,
amongst which was that, we now have in Saint Gillians
Fort, which keeps the name of the place whence 'twas
taken. He delivered up the City to Plunder,The pluder of the City. not reserving
for himself the point of a Lance, a constant despiser
of the Riches of the East; 'twas for this and other
Virtues,Our assistance from Heaven. the Governour (as the Moors affirm) was always
assisted by some Divine power, for on the top

of the Church they saw a Virgin, whose brightness
they were not able to behold,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. at whose sight their
hearts fail'd, on which they quitted their Arms, some
out of fear, others out of reverence. This favour from
Heaven is not above belief, if we consider the justice
of the Cause,How many the Moors lost. and piety of the General. There Dy'd of
the Moors five thousand, amongst them were Rumecaon,
Alucaon, Accedecaon, and other Turks of Name; the
Prisoners were six hundred, who afterwards honour'd
the Triumph;Our dead and wounded. we lost of Ours thirty, the Wounded
were neer three hundred.
         29. The Governour had but few days rest in the
repose of Victory, being immediately seis'd on by the
Anxious care of Re-building, rather founding the Fortress
from the first Foundation; a Work, for the Necessity
of it indispensable, for our Straights impossible,
for the expences of so long a Warr had drain'd the
States Revenues, so pawn'd besides, as only to be redeem'd
by a Peace of long continuance;The Governour Builds up the Fortress. yet the Governour,
not Disheartned by these difficulties, went
about beginning the new Fabrick, with a new design;
for in the judgment of the Skilfull, 'twas requisite to
enlarge the Situation, to make the Walls thicker, the
Bastions nearer, to Build Magazins in a dry place for the
keeping Ammunition, and Provision, that it might
be preserv'd well conditioned, which it had not been
formerly, but by the moistness of the Soil corrupted.
Materials could not be bought, or brought, without
pay, or wages; Stone-cutters, Pioneers and Work-men
ask't satisfaction for their Labour.
         The Governour had neither Plate, or Jewels to serve
his occasions, so as to be forc't to try other Pawns,
Valuable by his honour, not their own nature. He
commanded the Bones of his Son Dom Fernando to be
ta'ne up, to send 'em in an unheard of Pawn to the City
of Goa, but the Earth having not quite corrupted the
Body, he cut off some hairs of his own Beard,Pawns for it the hairs of his Beard. on which
he ask't twenty thousand Pardaos of the Chamber of

Goa; his affection for his Country finding him out a
strange way, never light upon by those Loyal Decios,
Curtios, and Fabios, of whom Rome yet proud, preserves
their Memory in the Ruins of her Empire. The pawn
was accompany'd by this following Letter.
         
            
               
                  
                     A Letter writ from Dio by the Governour
Dom Iohn de Castro to
the City of Goa.
                     GEntlemen, Magistrates, Iudges, and People, of the
most Honourable and always Loyal City of Goa; I
writ to you some days since by Simaon Alvarez one of your
Citizens the news of the Victory God gave me against the
Commanders of the King of Cambaya, and that you might
without any allay enjoy the pleasure and satisfaction of the
Victory, I spoke not in my Letter, of the great streights and
necessities I was in; but now I think fit, no longer to dissemble,
and to give you an account of the urgencies which are upon me,
and to desire your assistance to supply, and remedy things of
so great moment as are now in my hands; for the Fortress
of Dio is so beaten down to the ground, as not one foot of the
Wall can serve again, so as 'tis not only necessary this Summer
to Build it up again, but with such Skil, and in such a form
as the King of Cambaya may lose his hopes, of being at any
time able to take it. To this trouble is added an other as
great, or greater, to me incomparably above all others, which
is the trouble and perplexity the Lasquerins put me to for
their Pay, which I have secur'd to 'em, else would they be all
gone, and I should be left alone in the Fortress; which would
put me into no little danger, and consequently all India; for
the Commanders of the King of Cambaya, with those men
who are left of the Defeat, quarter at Suna, two Leagues
from this Fortress, and the King every day sends 'em Horse
and Foot to increase their Camp, as if they would return and

try their fortune by giving an other Battail, wherefore I am
in great want of a considerable sum of Money, and, because
it concerns the service of our Lord the King, and complies
with your Honour, and Loyalty, I earnestly begg of you to
remember your old Custom, and great Generosity, which oblig'd
you (as good and Loyal Subjects) always to relieve
the urgent necessities of his Majesty, and for the great and
intimate affection I have for you all, you would lend me
twenty thousand Pardaos, which as a Gentleman I promise,
and on the Holy Gospel swear, before a years end to see you
Repaid, though I should be set upon, by greater necessities,
and extremities, then those by which I am at present environ'd.
I commanded the taking up my Son Dom Fernando,
whom the Moors kill'd in this Fortress (fighting for God,
and our Lord the King) to pawn to you his Bones, but they
were found so, as 'twas not fit to take 'em out of the ground,
by which I am without any other Pawn, but part of my
Beard, which I hear send you by Diogo Rodriguez de Azevedo,
for as you know, I have neither Gold, Plate, Household-stuff,
or any thing of Value to secure your Estate, only a
plain and naked truth given me by God Almighty. But
that you may more certainly rely on your Payment, and it
may not be thought by some, that (what hath at other times
fallen out) some intervening accident may keep you from
it; I here send you an order for the Treasurer of Goa to be
paying you out of the Tax for the Horse, engaging all can
be made of it, till you are re-imburst; for the manner of the
paying it you are to fix it with him; Excuse me for not affecting
words to heighten to you my extremities, being, from
what I have said before firmly perswaded, that you will in
this Conjuncture, do what you can, and above your abilities,
without any other mediation, then your accustomed Nobleness,
and our reciprocal Affection. I recommend my self, Gentlemen,
to your Goodness. 
                     
                        Dated at Dio the twenty third of
November, Year 1546.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         30. Upon the Messengers arrival at Goa, the people
furnish't him with more then he demanded, seeing they

had a Governour, so little proud as to ask, so great as to
defend 'em;The Citizens of Goa return 'em. they return'd him those honourable Pawns,
which are at present preserv'd in the hands of the
Bishop,They are yet preserved. Inquisitor General, his most deserving Grandchild,
who put 'em in an Urn or Pyramid of Crystal,
set in a Basis of Silver, on which are Engraven several
Disticks, which make an ingenious Memory of so famous
an Action; this honourable Relique remaining
with his Posterity, to make Hereditary the virtues of
Dom Iohn de Castro. With the Money was carry'd the
following Letter.
         
            
               
                  
                     The Chamber of Goa's Letter in
answer to the Governours.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
                     
                     MOst Illustrious, and Excellent Captain General, and
Governour of India, for the High and Mighty, and
most Excellent Prince our Lord the King. Diogo Rodriguez
de Azevedo, arriv'd at this City on Monday the
sixth of December, and the next day delivered a Letter to
the Chamber from your Illustrious Lordship, which was read
with no little pleasure, and satisfaction, because, by it we
were assur'd of your Health, which good news we always
covet to know, and desire encrease of, and for it, this City,
and People, in general, and by themselves, give God many
thanks, and are confident in our Lady, the Virgin Mary, the
Mother of God and our Advocate, that as long as the people of
India hath your Illustrious Lordship: for their Captain, and
Governour, we shall never want the Divine assistance in our
affronts and troubles, in recompence of your most Catholick
and modest Life, your Carriage, and Actions of most commendable
Virtue, on which hope we now enjoy our present
quiet; for, the late and glorious Victory atchiev'd by your
prudent Conduct, great Courage and Magnanimity, the raising
the Siege of Dio, the routing and defeating the King of
Cambaya's whole Army, besides above twenty thousand

others, Moors, Turks, Rumes, Coracos, and Renegade
Christians, Germans, Venetians, Genuese, and French,
and diverse other Nations, (considerable numbers of whom
were Kill'd by our Lances and Swords, as this City is
assur'd by honest men and eye-witnesses) these good Services
are certain signs, that for the future, by God's grace
and protection, we need not fear any other troubles which
shall appear from a fresh Army of the King of Cambaya,
or other Neighhouring Kings and Potentates, or whole India,
who are certainly our implacable Enemies, besides being
Infidels, and haters of our holy Catholick Faith, from neither
of whom can we have any secure or firm Peace, though
some shew of a double and cousening Friendship. As for
the Loan, which in the name of our Lord the King you ask
of us, the Cities answer is, That we the Inhabitants will now
and always do our duty in serving his Majesty with our
Estates, Lives and Souls; and because the Cities, and
every particular man's design is to serve your Illustrious
Lordship with an Eye that such a Loan is very much for the
service of our Lord the King, whose the City is, and we are
all, with a great deal of diligence and care, from the day that
Diogo Rodriguez de Azevedo delivered his message, to
the present (which is the seven and twentieth of December)
have we rais'd twenty thousand, one hundred and
forty six Pardaos, and one Tanga, at five Tangas the Pardao,
which the City lends, that is Citizens??? and People, as
also the Bramens, Merchants, Traders, and Goldsmiths; and
by our Letters we assure your Lordship, that this City, and
its honourable Inhabitants, are bound for your service to lay
down our Lives more chearfully then for our own honour and
interest. As for the Pawns your Lordship sent us, the City
and Inhabitants think our selves injur'd by your Lordship to
rely so little on us, and our Loyalies; for in a business that
so concern'd the service of our Lord the King, and his Royal
State, such honourable and glorious Pawns were not necessary,
our Loyalty obliging us to serve the King, and
present necessity, after that your Obligations on us, and your
Lordship great affection and love to this City and Inhabitants,

for which, and what besides we confess owing to you, we
kiss your hands, and begg of God Almighty your enjoying
perfect health, and prosperity, in much honour, and great
Victories over the Enemies of our most holy Faith. My
Lord, Diogo Rodriguez de Azevedo returns to carry you
back your Pawns, and he, and Bertholamew Bispo Procurator
of this City bring you the Money, which the City,
and People lend you, of their good and free will; they carry
too, the order you sent hither to the Treasurer for the payment
of the Money; and our desires, you would accept all, as from
Loyal Subjects, we profess to be to our Lord the King, and
men oblig'd to your Lordship.
                     
                        Dated at the Chamber
the twenty seventh of December, 1547. 
                        and I Lewis
Tremessaon Clerk of the Chamber gave order for the
writing it, and sign'd it, by the authority I have so to
do.

                           
                              Pero Godinho,
                              Iohn Rodriguez Paez,
                              Ruy Goncalvez,
                              Ruy Dioz,
                              Iorge Ribeiro,
                              Bertholamew Bispo.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         31. The works at the Fortress went on with so great
satisfaction to the Officers,The work go on at the Fortress. and Labourers, as it advanc't
without time, and the pay of Work-men and Souldiers
was so punctual, as the State was only poor; for the
Governour, besides what the City lent, the Ladies, and
Gentlewomen, sent him in a Cabinet their Diamonds,
and Jewels, by which Female impotency sacrifis'd both
to Glory and Vanity; an offer which expected neither
interest, or recompence; whence is seen, how much better
the People supply the Virtues, then Tyrannies of
Regents.
         32. He commanded Dom Manoel de Lima with thirty
Ships to go along the Coast of Cambaya,And the Warr against Cambaya. and Burn all
the Villages, to shew the Sultan, his Revenge was not
satisfy'd by the Victory; but not to put in at the City
of Goga, because the intelligence said, that there were
imbody'd all those who scap't from the Battail. Dom
Manoel,Dom Manoel de Lima wageth it. (who again look't for good fortune in that
Bay) went Sailing along the Coast, and in a few days
of being out, was surpris'd by so violent a Tempest, as

to be forc't by the necessity of the Storm,Goes to the City of Goga. to put into
the Port forbidden by his instructions. The Citizens
having their imaginations fill'd with the late dangers,
at the sight of the same Arms which wounded 'em quitted
the City; the Souldiers, as well as the unserviceable
Rabble,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 3. in the same distemper flying to the Mountain.
There was at Anchor in the Port a Moorish Vessel,
belonging to the Qamalake, (one who was in good
correspondence with the State) which observing the
flight of the Moors hal'd to our men to fall upon the
City. Dom Manoel not understanding the sign, concluded
that in defiance they bid him Battail, and 'twixt
anger and impatience making ready, perceiv'd the City
emptying, and the poor people running in confus'd
multitudes towards a small Mountain, which was in
sight, believing the distance, and cragginess of its situation
would secure 'em from being fall'n upon by our
Souldiers; Dom Manoel found out the design of the
Ships hawling, and put to't, 'twixt the opportunity, and
his obedience, brought the business to Council; and
amongst Valiant Souldiers, Gallantry being the best interpreter
of Orders, 'twas voted they should enter the
City, because the Governours instructions could not
take in all accidents, who, if there, would be the first
should leap on shore; the Counsel was immediately
follow'd by Execution; Dom Manoel, almost without
any resistance entred the City; the pillage of the Souldiers
was great, and what was below the coveting, was
committed to the Fire, which burnt Estates and Houses;
the Dammage was greater then the Victory.Which he Sacks and Burns. Dom
Manoel took three Baneans Prisoners, by whom he was
told, that all the Inhabitants had sav'd themselves in a
place of the Mountain not farr of; he resolv'd to invest
it, that the fugitives and opposers might have the
same Punishment; at break of Day he went to the
place, taking with him for guides the Baneans, forc't by
miserable necessity to deliver up their Children and
Kindred; and those who thought themselves secure in

the shelter of the Mountain, saw over their Heads the
Sword, before the Enemy. The slaughter differenc't
not cause from cause, person from person, natives and
strangers, guilty and innocent with their Lives paid for
their own or an others offence. From Persons the
affront past to Religion, he caus'd many to be Hang'd
up in the Temples of their Idols, an outrage in the Superstition
of their Religion, inexpiable. He cut the
Throats of all the Cattel, sprinkling the Mosques with
Cows blood, an Animal, which as the depositary of
Souls, they adore with adominable worship.
         33. Dom Manoel de Lima return'd to his Ships,He returns on Board, and is in dange. and
ventur'd to cross the Bay, where without a Storm he
fear'd Shipwrack; for the Tide is there so unruly, and
impetuous, as is sufficient to loosen the Vessels. In
Sailing he came in fight of the City Gandar, peopled
by Pagan Merchants, rich by its Commerce, weak by its
Inhabitants. This was in the first Onset yielded, and
burnt,He destroys Gandar. the Natives discovered their Estates as a ransome
for their Lives, which neither by opposing nor yielding
could they save, for the anger, rather inhumanity of
the Souldiers more coveted blood then booty. He destroy'd
many other places of the Bay, whose ashes and
ruins for many years kept up the memory of their Destruction.
Those Natives who surviv'd the miseries of
their fellows, retir'd to the Inland of the Kingdome,
where in secure poverty they preserv'd themselves.
         34. Dom Manoel return'd for Dio,Returns for Dio. where he found
the Governour employ'd about the new Fortifications,
in whose sight the Works advanc't; diverse businesses
re-demanding him at Goa, he had a mind to leave the
Fortress in a state of defence. Dom Iohn Mascarenhas,
either wore out, or satisfy'd with the difficulties of the
Siege, before his time was out resign'd, his Government,
desiring that year to return for the Kingdome, to
enjoy that Fame of which he so well deserv'd. The
Governour endeavour'd to disswade him, fearing none
would accept it after him; for by the late Victory and

alteration of the Trade, the Spurrs of honour, and
profit, were Blunted, the greatest incentives men Bow
under. But Dom Iohn Mascarenhas's resolution to go
for the Kingdome,Dom Iohn Mascarenhas leaves his Command. in Lourenco Pirez de Tavora's Fleet,
put the Governour upon finding out a Commander for
the Garrison, which some Gentlemen had refus'd to be,
out of Dislike to a place which had been the Seat of so
many Victories, perhaps out of the hazard there is to succeed
Persons of extraordinary Eminency;Dom Manoel de Lima offers to continue in it. yet Dom
Manoel de Lima offer'd to remain on the place, out of
either complacency to the Governour, or confidence of
himself.
         35. The Governour in the mean time provided for
his passage to Goa, and ordered Antonio Moniz Barretto
with some Ships to look out for the Fleet of Cambaya,Antonio Moniz takes some Ships.
which (by his private intelligence) he knew were to
Visit the Coast of Por, and Mangalor, which Moniz
meeting at Sea, Boarded, and carry'd into Dio, their
Lading help't to bear the States charges. The King of
Cambaya in his resentment of so many losses, burst forth
into a most barbarous Revenge,The barbarous revenge of the King of Cambaya. commanding two of
our innocent Prisoners, taken during the Warr, to be
Kill'd, taking his satisfaction for so great Outrages on so
little shadows.
         36. The affairs of Dio being concluded, fortune
began to alarm the State with new accidents; The
Governour had from Ormus repeated intelligence,News from Ormus. that
the Turks with a mighty Army had thrown out of Balsora
Mahomet As-Cnam, a Loyal friend to the State, who
summon'd our Arms, as Auxiliary forces, to resist the
common Enemy. The dangers, and consequences of
having so unruly a Neighbour, were of no difficult
discovery, for whom and us the World, much less the
State, would be too narrow; The importancy of Balsora
was weig'd, as a Foundation laid for greater designs;
whose situation we will briefly acquaint you
with.The description of Balsora. Balsora is a Colony of four thousand Families,
seated in Arabia the Happy, in twenty four degrees of

Northern Latitude, not farr distant from the River Euphrates.
'Tis from the Fortress of Ormus two hundred
Leagues, from Babylon a little above forty. Ships go
from Ormus thither along the Coast of Persia, having
on that side more convenient Ports and Watering. 'Tis
inhabited by Moors, Schismaticks from the Turks, for
though all Worshippers of Mahomed, yet differ in their
Belief; these following the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Persian, whom the Divel in different Cups makes to
drink of the abominations of Mahomed; here the Turks
fortify'd themselves,
                themselves in it. and began to gain upon the Neighbouring
Arabians, on some by Arms, on others by Benefits,
setting up a new Prince in Balsora, who being of
the Race of their antient Kings was lik't of by the
Arabs, and would be faithfull to the Turks, whose Liberality,
under a shew of friendship, Veyl'd their ambition
of ruling. This mans pretensions, whom the Turks
saluted for King, others write at large, I omit the relation,
as importune to the Reader, and from the design
of the History.
         37. The Governour resolv'd to send Dom Manoel de
Lima for the Fortress of Ormus,Dom Manoel de Lima goes for Ormus, (which came to him
by the Death of Dom Manoel da Sylveita) that as the
Perquisits of the place he should take on him the obligation
of managing the Warr against the Turks; the
Fortress of Dio, being once more left as a Stone of offence,
rejected by the Builders; for no Gentleman
would remain there, with only the care of the Fortifications,
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas carrying away with
him the glory of the danger. I know not if the affairs
of India are now held in the same respect. The Governour
was troubled the Theater of so many Victories
should be laid aside,And Dom Iohn Mascarenhas returns to his Command in Dio. which Dom Iohn Mascarenhas
hearing, offer'd that Winter to continue in the place,
a thing taken very well by the Governour, who told
him, whilst the Fortress was finishing, 'twould be Wall'd
by his reputation; and that it may be known how
facil this so great Personage was in confirming other

mens deserts, I'le set down a Letter he writ to his Son
Dom Alvaro,What the Governour writes of him to his Son Dom Alvaro, upon Dom Iohn Mascarenhas going to Goa
to take passage for the Kingdome. There comes by
this occasion Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, the same the
Pagans, and Moors take him for, I who am a good
Christian make the same confession of his Courage,
having, in all the Fights found him always at my side;
He goes to embark for the Kingdome, I ask it of you,
to entertain him, as you would my own Person, and
not to consent he should Lodge any where but with
you, which yet is below his merits, I hope in God
he will in a little time return to these Parts, to correct
my Defects. He also writ largely to the King of
every mans Desert,and to the King of every one. said nothing of himself, betraying
his partiality for other mens services, his ingratitude for
his own.
         38. Order being taken about Dio, the Governour
left Dom Iorge de Menezes with six Ships,He leavs Dom Iorge on that Coast. to hover the
rest of the Summer about the Bay of Cambaya, and
gave him instructions to proclaim in all the adjacent
places, That all the Moors, and Pagans might return
to Inhabit the Island, for under shelter of his Justice,
their Persons and Commerce should be secure, enjoying
their Antient peace and freedome; and truth being
credited by Courage, the Pagans as much sought for the
protection of our Arms, as Laws, there coming in great
numbers of Merchants and Inhabitants to improve the
Trade, counting that Peace secure, which begun on the
confines of Warr.
         39. The Governour took Shipping for Goa,Embarks for Goa. expected
there by the general applause of all people, the
articulate Ecchos of his Victory; in ten days he came
into Port, where the Bishop, the Commander in chief,
and Magistrates came to Visit him,Arrives, and is vised at Sea. desiring him to stay
at Pangim, whilst the City prepar'd the Triumph they
intended for his Reception, that the World might not
think 'em uncivil, barbarous, or ungratefull; that so deserv'd
a Triumph, was not the ambition of the Person,

but glory of the State; that Kings carry away the advantages
of Victories, Subjects the honour; that he
might scorn the Reward, without refusing the Memory.
         40. The Governour suffer'd himself to be o'recome
by the kindness of the People,A Triumph is decreed him. as one who could not
sleight the honours of a Triumph, without injuring
those who bore him Company in the atchievement,
nor limit the popular Rejoycing, without envying the
common prosperity; their festival Solemnities having
their excuse in our Fortune, their example in the Caesars.
The fifteenth of April of the Year 1547. was appointed
for the day of the Triumph, the first, and last,
our Arms ever saw, us'd to purchase Fame without
glory. The City Built in Saint Catherines Basar, a great
Arch, covering the Materials with diverse Carpets. The
gate of the City was from the top of the Wall thrown
down,The Fabrick of it. the Stones appearing humble, or gratefull; the
Hangings of the Walls were of Rich cloth of Gold,
greatness could do no more, the general satisfaction was
not content with less. In many places the Adornment
was of diverse Colour'd Velvets, that the Gold might
set off the Majesty, the diversity of Colours the pleasantness.
On the Walls on each side the Gate were
two gilded Lyons, upholding in their Paws the wheels
of the Castros,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 6. always Famous, now Triumphant.
There run along by the Arch a dilated Thicket of Trees,
which with intermitting shades, qualify'd the heat,
without hindring the light. The Sea appear'd all cover'd
with Ships, Galleys, Boats, and Brigantines, which
came from the Nighbouring Islands, all with their
Streamers and Wast-cloaths. There was in the Court
of the Palace a Fortress, design'd for the Model of Dio,
within it some Guns charg'd without Bullets, and other
Fire-arms, a pleasant Representation of former Horrours.
In the same Fortress was hid exquisite Musick,
which with Tunables voices kept time in singing the
praises of the Governour, delighting by their sweetness,

the Ear, by their words, the Judgment. The general
correspondency in the adorning the Streets, was as if
design'd to shew the Riches of the East; The Embroidery,
as common, was look't upon with scorn. The
Cloaths of the Citizens were in all kinds such, as if the
People had Triumph'd; Neither, if their hearts could
have been seen, would the applause of their souls have
seem'd less, being the voluntary Demonstrations of inartificial
affections.
         41. The Governour came from Pangim in a little
Gally,The Governours entry. differenc't from the rest by its Adorning; he had
with him the old Cavalliers, his Companions in the
Expedition, who shar'd equally of the glory and danger.
The Galleons of the Fleet went on Head, in
their Stern follow'd the Vessels with Oars, with their
Sails furl'd in the Brayles, and all shadow'd with the
Verdure of several Boughs, appearing from the Land, a
loose Wood, or moving City. When they came in sight
of the Fortress, by the horrour of their Salute, the
Warr seem'd rather real then apparent; the Guns also
from the Shore, gave 'em so terrible an answer, as the
senses could not distinguish whether it were a Fight or
Triumph; all the Fleet opened to make way for the
Governours Gally. He was richly Cloath'd, giving the
Season its due, and became them as well, and sprightly as
his Arms; He had on, a French suit of Crimson Satin,
with Gold twist about the Slashes and Seams, and not
to forget he was a Souldier, he put on a Coat of Mail
wrought on Cloth of Gold with Buttons of Plate,
Feathers in his Hat, and the Guarniture of his Sword
Gold. Upon the Key, the Officers of the Militia,
Nobility, and Magistracy of the City waited for him,
with whom he entred the first Gate, where one of the
Consuls made him a sober Speech in Latin, shewing,
that by the advantage of his Valour we had humbled
the proudest Scepter of the East, whose Ruins would
be his Fames best Trumpets; that Portugal had now
secur'd the State, born again in his Arms, who fought as

well for Religion, as Empire, so laying his designs, as
the Voice of the Gospel reach't Parts so remote; that
now the Moors and Pagans could not but believe that
God to be Great, who was the God of so great Victories;
that after long Revolutions of time in the East,
men Sailing by would point at the place of the Battail,
the Destruction of Cambaya going in Tradition from Nation
to Nation, from Kingdome to Kingdome; that
Parents would tell it their Children, to fright 'em with
the memory of former Dangers; that now our Colours
gloriously Roll'd up, might rest in the Temple of Peace,
having opened that of Victory. He discours'd largely
upon the passages of his Government, yet in the
thoughts of the people, was rather sparing, then extravagant
in his Virtues, greater in the Eyes of strangers,
then in our praises. The end of the Speech had its
Cadence in the Harmony of differing, and agreeing Instruments;
immediately were Shot off some Guns,
charg'd instead of Bullets with diverse Comfits,They receive him under a Canopy. which
falling at a little distance, made a pleasant, though running
Banquet for the common people. The Magistrates
of the City receiv'd the Governour under a Canopy,The order of the Triumph.
and presently a Citizen of quality, reverently
bowing, took his Hat from his Head, putting him on a
Crown of Triumph, and in his hand a Palm. The
Guardian of the Franciscan's Order walk't before, with
the Crucifix he held up in the Battail, the Arm unnail'd,
and hanging, (a Signal by which the Divine Majesty
not only in that but this Age hath secur'd to us our
Kingdoms and VictoriesDom Antonio de Sousa de Macedo (now Secretary of State in Portugal) in the third Chapter of the third Book of his Lusitania Liberata (Printed at London 1645.) saith, The design of shaking of the King of Spain being Compleated, by Killing the Secretary, and Proclaming Iohn the Fourth Duke of Braganza (at that time at his House in the Country) the Nobility, in the King's absence desir'd the Arch-bishop of Lisbone to Govern the City; who going in solemn Procession to the Palace, as he past by Saint Anthonies Church, and was praying to the Saint to intercede for the good of the Kingdome, and his Native Conntry, the Arm of a rich Crucifix which was carry'd before him, Miraculously unnail'd and held it self forth to the people, who receiv'd the Miracle, with acclamations crying out, God stretcheth out the hand of his power to free the Portuguese, and decide their cause against the Castillian, who had said, he only desir'd God should be Judge. This is the Miracle hinted at by the Author, and compar'd to the Crucifixes having an Arm unnail'd in the Battail, as was related in the 22. Parag. of this Book.) there follow'd the Royal

Banner of our Cinks, beheld by the Moors and Pagans
with fresh admiration; immediately came the Standarts
of Cambaya, dragg'd on the ground in the sight of Iuzarcaon,
and other Commanders pinion'd, who represented
the Tragedy of their Fortune, for them compassionate,
to us pleasant; there were seen six hundred
Prisoners, dragging their Chains after them, after them
the Field-pieces, with different and numerous Arms.
The Ladies from their Windows sprinkled the Triumpher
with distill'd waters of diverse Spices. The Officers
through whose hands past the Gold, and other rich
Commodities, came and made him voluntary offerings,
the equal disposition of their affections being more
Valuable then the Triumph. The beautify'd, and open
Churches shew'd their acceptance and thanks. In this
order he went to Visit the Cathedral, the Mother-Church
of the East, where the Bishop, and Clergy receiv'd
him with the Hymn Te Deum Laudamus; being
entred into the See, with Religious offerings he acknowledg'd
the Author of Victories, and it being now
late, with little Ceremony retir'd to the Palace, one
days time being too narrow for the Majesty of the
Triumph.
      
      
         
         THE LIFE OF
DOM IOHN DE CASTRO.
         The Fourth BOOK.
         THere were but few Kingdoms in the East,
which in the Government of Dom Iohn
de Castro did not Alarme that State, by
diverse Rumours of Warr, by either
Arms against us, or against one the other,
inviting our Forces to make Peace, or
forward the Victory; the East also saw him often girt
his Sword for the cause of Religion.
         1. King Iohn had sent to the Island of Zeilan some
Franciscan Friars,Franciscan Friars go for Ceilan. exemplary in their Lives and Doctrine,
that by Martyrdome and Preaching, they
might bear witness of the truth of the Gospel, that being
our Prince's greatest concernment, whose Banners
Asia saw oftner display'd in reverence to Religion,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 7. then
ambition of Empire. These Friars on their Landing in
the Island were by the King of Cotta civilly entertain'd,
the Sun of Righteousness beginning once more to rise
in the East. That Paganism began to Listen to the
Voice of Heaven, and that Barren ground to answer
the pains by its Improvement, by the coming in of infinite
Sheep to the Sheep-fold of the Church.
         2. Those Embassadours of the Gospel went forward,
to give News of the Light to the King of Candea,They preach the Faith in Candea, and the King hearkens to it. in

the heart of the Island, whom they found Courteous
in the entertainment of their Persons, flexible to the
obedience of their Doctrine; He was instructed in the
mysteries of our Belief, that with a stronger Faith he
might wash in the waters of Baptism. He gave the
Friars ground, Materials, and Money, for the Building a
Church; that being the first Fortress the Conquest of
the Gospel rais'd in the Island against the delusions of
Idolatry; for of the Preaching of the Apostle Saint
Thomas (if it reach't so farr) neither had their Understandings
any light, nor their Country memory.
         3. That Prince shew'd himself obedient to the precepts
of our Religion,He is inconstant. but not constant, for the fear
of his Subjects revolting on his change of Doctrine,
made him, not to lose what he Esteem'd, forsake what
he was Convicted of; for as a Plant not yet Rooted,
the force of human perswasion enclin'd him either way.
The Religious men endeavour'd to take those Rubbs
out of the way of Life,He Friars encourage him. by assuring him that under the
protection of our Religion, and Arms, he might secure
both Crowns, for the State was at that time Govern'd
by Dom Iohn de Castro, who for the propagation of the
Faith us'd to venture his Blood, for his Friends, the
State.
         4. The King listned to the proposition, saying, if
the Governour would send him Relief,His resolution. he would not
only himself profess the Faith, but preach it to his Subjects.
One of the Friars carry'd this resolution to Goa;
the Governour,The Governour desires that Conversion, and sends to him Antonio Moniz. certify'd of the cause of his coming,
desir'd the Conversion of that Prince, as his greatest
business in the East, not less zealous in giving Children
to the Church, then Victories to the State.
He immediately dispatch't Antonio Moniz Barretto
with seven Fly-boats, and Orders, that if he found
any of our Ships at Sea to carry 'em with him; writ
honourable Letters to the Prince, which he accompany'd
with several Presents: but leaving Antonio
Moniz at Sea, we will (to observe the order of time in

the Relation of successes) speak of the taking of Baroche.
         5. The Governour had dispatch't from Dio, Dom
Iorge de Menezes, to commit all imaginable Hostilities
in the Bay of Cambaya, to show the Sultan the edge of
our Arms was not Blunted, by their former Execution.
Dom Iorge took some Vessels of Provision going to furnish
the Enemies Ports, that those the Sword had
spar'd, might be made an end of by Famine. He came
one Evening in sight of the City Baroche, whose stately
Buildings presented him with the Politeness of Europe.
'Twas situated on an Eminency surrounded with
Brick-walls,The Situation and Fortifying of Baroche. which were more for shew, then defence;
yet were there diverse Bull-works to be seen, made not
without some in-sight in Fortification, furnish't withstore
of Ordnance, which commanded the entrance into
the Haven. The height of the situation discovered
the Gates to be of square Stone polish't, and the correspondency
of Turrets and Windows, argued the
wealth and policy of the Inhabitants. The Trade of
the place was in very fine Silks, a Commodity exported
thence to many Ports of the East. Madre Maluco
was Lord of the City,Madre Maluco Lord of it. and had Tributary the Neighbouring
Villages, which, by their fertility and bigness,
made him up a moderate Seignory.
         6. Our men had by chance taken a little Boat of
Fisher-men, Natives of the place, who upon enquiry
told what we have related of the City, and upon Dom
Iorge's desire to know what Garrison was in the place,
had said, that Madre Maluco had carry'd all the Souldiery
to Amadabat, the Sultan's Court, and at present were
remaining only some Artisans, and other Trades-men.
Dom Iorge thinking the occasion opportune for assaulting
the City, though his strength was not proportionable
to such a design, yet (events depending on accidents)
resolv'd to run his Fortune; and to amuse the
Inhabitants in security, steer'd an other course, Sailing
by a different Rumbe, taking along with him the Fishermen,

to be his Pilots in the entrance. At night the
whole Fleet tacking about,Dom Iorge enters by Night. stood up with the Port, and
getting all on Shore, (the Enemies confidence, or negligence,
being unprovided of any Defence, or Sentinel)
fell upon the Unarm'd, and weak Multitude, when the
Night, Confusion, and Sleep, run 'em upon the danger
they avoided, miserably wandering, they shun'd their
own as Enemies, flying from those who fled themselves.
The skreeks of the Children stirr'd not up in their Parents
any Compassion, less Vengeance, for the suddain
fear gave 'em over to the basest affections of Nature;
the Crys and Laments of the Women discovered them,
their, Ah me, being their greatest danger; those who by
flying into Houses scap't the Sword, were in them consum'd
by the Fire, the poor people having no remedy
against, but choice of their Death; the Invasion, and
Sack was at the same time; the Slaughter, as in a Fight
without resistance; the Plunder, as in a City forc't to
deliver. Dom Iorge in fine purchas'd in this Action,
Fame without Danger, Victory without an Enemy;
yet doubt we not that had he found more Opposition,
his Courage would have atchiev'd what his Fortune
effected. He commanded the City to be Burnt, where,
in a few hours, the Nobility and People, Gardens and
Houses became compassionate Ashes, without any distinction
of nature, or separation of place. He put on
Board some of the smaller Guns, broke in pieces the
great. This Action being so famous amongst our Souldiers,
as to give him who was call'd Menezes, the Sirname
of Baroche, as the Ruins of Carthage gave Scipio
the name of Africanus.
         7. Maluco came with five thousand Horse; soon
enough to deplore, too late to help,Maluco comes too late. and seeing the
Fire and Sword had left nothing in its own shape, return'd
impatiently to the King of Cambaya, as one
whose green Wound very sensibly smarted. He represented
to him the Destruction of the City, as an Outrage
aggravated by being the latest of so many; The

Sultan seem'd touch't with this new accident, and
Vow'd once more to set upon Dio the stone of offence,
on which was broke the strength of so vast an Empire;
but while the Heart-burnings of Cambaya vent themselves
in an imaginary Revenge, we will speak of the
Spirituals of Candea, which as Seed choak't up by Thorns
came not to produce any Fruit.
         8. Madune King of Cotta came to know that the King
of Candea endeavour'd by the change of his Religion
to get the protection of the State, (who as those Pagans
are zealous observers of their errors) sought for
arguments to perswade him,The King of Cota against the King of Candea's Conversion. that Idolatry was necessary
for his Crown, telling him, his new Belief would make
his Subjects rebell,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 8. the Neighbouring Kings his Enemies,
himself Ingratefull to his old Gods, who had for so
long prospered the Scepter of Candea in his Royal Progenitors;
that the Governour of India must of necessity
be the most Insolent man upon Earth, who
suffered not the World to have any other King, or God,
but that, he Obey'd, and Ador'd; that he deny'd not
the Portuguese Religion, to be either better, or more
fortunate, since they serv'd the God of Victories; yet
'twas sufficient for him to serve the Gods of the Country
he was Born in, without coveting a better Posterity,
or greater Fortune then his Predecessors; besides,
who knew that the Governour under pretence of Religion
design'd not the usurpation of his Scepter; that
he ought not to receive on the Island, men of such a
temper as could not be satisfy'd, without being the
Lords, to be any where; that if the Franks promis'd
him, to furnish him with a better Creed, and inlarge his
Territories, what sound judgment would credit so unusual
goodness in men he never saw, especially when
they were not so great despisers of Temporalities, but
to come from the end of the World to Domineer in
Asia? that if example had with him any Authority, he
should find more Kingdomes destroy'd by 'em, then indoctrinated;
that 'twas true, their Ioques (by them

call'd Priests) did willingly Dye for their Religion'
but did it, either out of an ambition of Name, or prodigality
of Life; if there were not in the West more Fools,
then in other Parts, who were all possest with that dangerous
obstinacy of instructing the World; that in fine,
he Counsel'd him as a King and Ally to cut off the
Relief he expected from the Franks, in expiation to his
old Gods, justly incenst to be thrown off for a forein
Divinity; that were it their Pride in pretending to
come and enlighten his Understanding, or ambition to
usurp his Kingdome, the Circumstance of either fault
deserv'd this Punishment; that in prosecution of it he
would assist him with Arms, and Souldiers, making that
a common Cause, which was the Outrage of all their
Idols.
         9 The unfortunate Prince not able at once to throw
off the weight of his old Errors,The King of Candea consents. suffered himself to be
perswaded by the Arguments of his Barbarous, and
Treacherous friend; his Eyes yet darkned with the
Clouds of Idolatry, not being able to endure the Dawning
of the Light of Truth, and immediately, wanting
prudence or resolution, conspir'd in Madune's Treachery,
like a Diseas'd Frantick, angry with the Physicians:
In fine, they expected their Guests, resolv'd to put
in Execution their plotted malice.
         10. Antonio Moniz being parted from Goa,Antonio Moniz Voyage. found
some of our Ships in several Ports, which, according to
his Orders, he joyn'd to his Fleet; having doubled the
Cape of Camorim, and past the Quick-sands of Manar,
he steer'd for Baticalou, to go from thence by Land to
Candea. He had with him twelve Fly-boats, out of
which he took one hundred and twenty select Souldiers,
and with them march't, in the security that he was
going to a Prince, a Friend, and one obliged by the State,
above all, if not yet a Convert, at least gratefull, and
a well-willer to the truth of that Doctrine we profest;
at his coming to Candea,He comes to Candea, and finds all things altered. by every ones being in Arms,
the Treason could not be kept so close as that Antonio

Moniz had not notice of it by diverse advices, and by
their pretending to divide his Souldiers, so to Kill 'em
more securely; besides, the King in Person would not
see 'em, perhaps, not to discover by his Affections, his
Timerous, and guilty Conscience. Antonio Moniz
march't presently out of the City, Commanded all the
Impediments and Baggage to be Burnt, to be thus
more at liberty, to Defend and Retreat, and assembling
his Souldiers spoke to 'em;
         11. Friends and Companions, you all know the
Treason plotted against us by this Pagan King, whom
we come to serve and assist;He endeavours to resist. I have intelligence they
will set upon us by open Force, having now a reason,
or cause to hurt us, they had not before, that is, that
we have found out their Treachery. None of us hath
any more Life, then he can Defend; Courage, and
Discipline may save us; we expect no Relief, for it lies
in our selves; and the Infidels will not persist in their
Treason, if they find it Costly; and what is it? if in
this Conjuncture we do that for our selves, we came
to do for them, that is, lose our Lives. The passages
which go to Baticalou, where our Fleet is, must be
suppos'd Lin'd with the Enemy, wherefore I am of
opinion, for us to go to the King of Ceitavaca, a
faithfull Friend to the State, where we shall find entertainment
and secure protection to go from thence
in quest of our Fleet.
         
         12. As soon as Antonio Moniz began to march, the
Enemy appear'd in Companies,Is set upon by the Enemy. charging us with Arrows,
Darts, Stones, and other such Weapons, with which
they Wounded some of our men, and made account
by this importune way of Fighting to Destroy us without
danger. The Enemy appear'd to have a Body of
eight thousand men, Commanded by their Officers
(by them call'd Modeliares) expert in that wild way
of charging and retiring, out-going us in number and
agility, and without doubt would one by one have
Destroy'd us, had not our Musquets made 'em stand off,

from which they receiv'd no little Dammage, and greater
fear, for scar'd, by seeing some drop down Dead
suddainly, the rest follow'd us with more fear and caution;
they thus continued Gawling us all that day,
one while Venturous, another Cowards; with this unequal
and troublesome chase, they gave us a flow, but
un-interrupted charge.
         13. By the coming on of the Night our men had
more security, then repose,The difficulty he was in. for they were so disquieted
with wandring and roving Shot, that the poor Souldiers
could not take any little rest upon their Arms, eating
their Biscuit with their Eyes toward the Enemy, and
their Hands on their Weapons; so past they till the
next day, when they discovered the Pagans, more Venturous
and Daring, for that first horrour our Fire-arms
bred in 'em, was either quite lost or moderated. They
at last arriv'd to the confidence to charge us with short
Arms, on which Antonio Moniz was forc't to stop his
March, and sometimes front 'em, in this we cut off some
of their men, and took Prisoner, amongst the rest one
of their Modeliars, who by his Habit and Arms seem'd
to Command the party, as also, by their venturing and
daring to recover him, making several Charges, in
which they were worsted, yet so constant in their resolute
attaquing us, as our men quite worn out could no
longer maintain it.
         14. Some were of opinion to face the Enemy,His prudence in moderating his men. and
either by Fighting free themselves, or Dye reveng'd;
but Antonio Moniz told 'em, that the greatest proof of
their Courage would be enduring, and the only way to
save 'em; that they had already Conquer'd the greatest
part of the way; that Marching with care and in a
Body, they could not receive much Dammage; that
the greater the danger was, more would the pleasure be,
when they should tell it gloriously, and securely. Thus
did the Commander encourage 'em, and Bridle the
despair of so tedious a Resistance, till the coming of the
Night made 'em some amends for the Days difficulty;

for the Pagans being also broken, gave our men some
time to rest; yet at break of Day did they assault us
more furiously, asham'd perhaps to find amongst so few
so stout opposition. They now came on more boldly
on our men, who defended themselves, though with less
strength, with their usual Courage.
         15. Antonio Moniz commanded one to break the
Modeliars Leggs he had taken Prisoner, and cast him in
the way, whom his own men, leaving off Fighting, immediately
went to Relieve, mov'd by their affection or
pity, to see their Leader or Companion, in so compassionate
a condition; Our men, were for some time as if
without an Enemy, yet suddainly Fir'd with Commiseration,
or Revenge, did they violently fall upon us in
a narrow passage, which ended in a Bridge made over a
great River not to be Foarded; here Antonio Moniz
shew'd extraordinary Courage, facing the Enemy with
nine more,His courage in Fighting. till his Souldiers got over, and when he had
'em on the other side, broke a part of the Bridge, a
diligence, which stopp'd the Pagans passage, and pursute.
Antonio Moniz by so Heroick a defence got not
popular applause, yet the few who know how to Value
extraordinary Actions,His retreat. voted this Retreat worthy the
Fame of a signal Victory; they got at last to the King
of Ceitavaca, where they had kind, and hearty Reception,
and recover'd their Hunger, Wounds, and hard
March in a free and courteous Hospitality, who offered
'em his Forces to revenge so just a quarrel.
         16. The poor King of Candea repenting of the
Crime,The King of Candea repents. the perswasion of a Neighbour Prince induc't
him to commit, and abhorring the Treachery, as hatch't
in an others Brest, sent a Messenger to Antonio Moniz
with ten thousand Pardaos for the expence of his Fleet,Sends a Messenger.
and a Letter, that the sorrow was his, the mischief an
other mans; that coming to him when an Infidel, he
should not now forsake him when a Christian; that the
God on whom he began to believe, was therefore so
great, because he pardoned offences; that he ought not

to suffer those tender Flowers which were Blossoming
in the Garden of the Church, to be unsheltered, expos'd
to the scorching of Idolatry; that his coming in
Arms being to weed that Wood of Pagan superstitions,
he should not wonder to get off hurt by the Briars, and
Thistles of Infidelity; that, the God they Preach't to
him, being so Gratious, did not in his Justice, without
Mercy save the World; that Earth ought not to despise
him, who was not cast off by Heaven; that he entreated
him to come to his Succour, who was ready to Sacrifize
all he had, for his Protection, and his Life for
Religion.
         17. Antonio Moniz on this Letter resolv'd to return
to Candea,Antonio Moniz defir'd to return, looking on the Interest of Religion to be
more considerable then the hazard of his Life; but the
Souldiers cleaving fast to the Plank they scap't on,
would not quit the protection of a Prince their Friend,
saying,His men are against it. The first cheat was a false Traitors, the second
would be a Credulous, and Incantelous Commanders,
that they would not return to trust that Viper which
had once bit 'em; for if when oblig'd by a voluntary
relief he would have Kill'd 'em, what would he now do
when provok't by their affronting his bafled Army?
that they would thank God for one Miracle without
asking an other; that the Governour sent them not as
Apostles, but Souldiers; that if they went to Dye for
the Faith, they might go without Arms, but their Calling
was not to Preach, but with their Sword defend
Religion. Antonio Moniz seeing the Souldiers cool'd
in their Zeal, and obstinate in their Obedience, considering,
that if God would save that people, he would
find out the means, resolv'd to recover his Fleet;He goes to his Fleet. and
while he is at Sea, we will to the business of Hidalcaon,
which we have Retarded.
         18. Hidalcaon alarm'd by Meale's being in Goa,Hidalcaon sends Souldiers upon the Continent. endeavoured
by the Cure of Arms to purge those Disquiets,
and because the Warr of Dio had weakned the
State, thinking to surprize the Governour in the

confidence, or carelesness of his Victories; knowing
also his absence from the City of Goa, he fell upon the
Territories of Bardez and Salsete, in the security of
Peace unguarded; He sent four thousand Souldiers,
who without drawing their Swords took possession, making
the Peasants bring in their Fruit, and the Annual
Customs they paid the State. The news of their Incursion
reach't Goa, and caus'd no little trouble by taking
them unprovided to resist the Enemy. They resolv'd
to expect the Governours return,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 9. whose name was
sufficient to take down Hidalcaon's Pride, only in the
Interim to Garrison the Fortress of Rachol, with this
small Curb to bridle the invasion of the Enemy.
         19. Upon the Governours arrival at Goa, he bestow'd
the first Days on the pleasure of his Success, but
would not pass any more in ease, as one who counted
Peace a Vice, Warr his Profession; He immediately
went to Agacaim, thence dispatch't Dom Diogo de Almeyda
Freire with nine hundred men to Dislodge the
Enemy, who with four thousand Souldiers quartered
in the Neighbouring Villages;They retire for fear of our. when the Moors heard
our men were on their March, without staying to hear
our Drums, or see our Colours, they retir'd to the
Mountain, out of respect (as was thought by all) to
the Victories of Dio, whose Fame had seis'd the whole
East with fear and reverence. The Campagnia was
again brought under our Obedience, enjoying with
the Jealousies of Warr, an insecure Peace, as was to be
expected from a Male-content and Neighbour Prince.
Hidalcaon, taking himself affronted by his mens Flight,
made the reputation of his Arms an other cause to raise
Warr, and sent eight thousand Souldiers to take in that
ground which was in dispute, whilst he was making
greater Levies, with an intention (as he gave out)
where his Kingdome lay at stake, to venture his Person;
but whilst Goa is unalarm'd by the noise of his Forces,
we will speak of the affairs of Malaca, and Maluco, dispos'd
by the Governours prudence, and finish't by his
Fortune.
         
            
20. Bernadim de Sousa was sent Governour to the
Maluco-Islands, which by their distance from the heart
of the State, were of a more fickle Obedience,Iohn de Barro' s History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. both
for the Subjection of the Natives, and Libertinism of
the Governours, who behav'd themselves as Absolute
and Independent. Iordaon de Freitas had sent the King
Aeyro to Goa,The king Aeyro sent Prisoner to Goa. in Chains unbecoming a Crown, and with
a false Process drawn against him; which Dom Iohn de
Castro commanded should be prov'd according to Law,
and absolving the poor King from the imputed Crimes,Absolv'd by the Governour,
after a Royal entertainment, restor'd the injuries of the
innocent Scepter with favour, and honour, Commanding
Bernadim de Sousa to give him possession of the
Kingdome, with more reverence then had been us'd to
other Kings, by our Governours, that that Nation
might take notice of the States clemency and justice,
which held the Scales even betwixt Friends and Subjects.
         21. Bernardim de Sousa arriv'd at the Island of Ternate,
and getting on Shore,Is brought to Ternate. went into the Fortress,
without those Ceremonies, the ambition of that people
Customarily us'd in the reception of their Governours.
Iordaon de Freitas who read in the suddain coming of
his Successour, and his own guilty Conscience, the
Process of his extravagancies, was not a little disquieted,
knowing Dom Iohn de Castro's impartiality, that
permitted not the Governours, to do, or receive any
injuries from the Confederate Kings, and that by Aeyros
being Justify'd, he must necessarily be Condemn'd; yet
gave Bernardim de Sousa possession of the Fortress, to
whom immediately repair'd Aeyro's Children, more to
know their Fathers punishment, then expect his return,
so Timerous are mens judgments in their desires; Bernardim
de Sousa bid them go fetch him to Shore in such
State, as it might appear, he rather went to plead Services,
then answer Accusations. His Children, though
not trusting to the pleasure of such unexpected News,
went running to the Sea-side, follow'd by multitudes

of the people, who look't upon, as a thing unusual,
Justice against one so Powerfull, admiring the equality
of our Laws, so indifferent to Natives, and Strangers.
Aeyro came on Shore, saying, we had against our selves,
given him the Victory, and that he would with his
A sign of Admiration amongst them. Finger in his mouth always speak of the Governours
excellencies; He carry'd in his hands the Fetters he had
on at his departure, making pass-time of the memory
of his grievances; by this Justice things in the Malucos
were for many years in a gratefull Obedience.
         22. Malaca at that time enjoy'd a most profound
Peace, setled by the friendship and commerce of the
Neighbouring Princes;Dverse Kings conspire against Malaca. yet the King of Viantata finding
he had Force enough to set upon any great design,
was by strength, and ease put in mind of many forgotten
grievances, which his Predecessors had receiv'd
from the Kings of Patana, and having good correspondence
with the Princes of Queda, Pam, and other Borderers,
found a way to bring 'em into a League, making
them take their parts in revenging an others Injuries;
they put to Sea a great Fleet, and by Capitulations
agreed, that the King of Viantata should be satisfy'd in
being reveng'd on his Enemy, and they go away with
the Booty of the Warr for Venturing their Lives in an
others quarrel.
         23. In this Conjuncture,How the Commander behaves himself. Simaon de Mello was Commander
of Malaca, and on knowledge of the Breach
betwixt those Princes, writ to Diogo Soarez de Mello,
who was in the Haven of Patane, to come to that Fortress,
for all those Kings being Friends to the State,
he had rather arbitrate then side in their differences;
besides, it was in Policy, reason to let 'em be broke by
a Warr, that being drain'd, they might Live with more
Subjection under the peace and obedience of our Arms,
considering time might furnish 'em with an opportutunity,
and their strength with Courage, our Dominion
over them being a sufficient cause for them to hate
us, and for a Warr, a strong Army look't for no other
pretensions.
         
            
24. Diogo Soarez not refusing the advice dispatch't
some Ships Laden for China,The King of Achem Lands, and immediately retires. and parted himself with two
little Galleys for Malaca. The King of Achem was at this
time with twenty great Vessels looking out for Prizes,
with the force of a Prince playing the part of a Pirat;
He took some Junks of Provisions, and at Sea behav'd
himself insolently to some Ships of his Friends, his success
heightned his confidence, Landing by Night in the
Port of Malaca, only to say he had set footing on ground
that Liv'd under our obedience, and with this glory
wonn solely by stealth, He immediately return'd on
Board.
         25. The City was in an Uproar, and the fear and
night encreas'd the danger, many flying from their own
shadows; the Crys of the fearfull only reach't the Fortress,
for they were surpris'd with fear without danger.
The Commander in chief sent out Dom Francisco d' Esa
with some Souldiers, who going into the Colony of the
Chelins, saw in every ones fear and confusion the face of
a Warr without an Enemy, who was by this time on
Board, carrying with him only the imaginary vanity of
having Landed; Simaon de Mello was as sensible of the
King of Achem's Cowardise, as if it had been an Outrage;
so sacred were the Walls of that Fortress, as if to
march towards 'em had been an Insolence, to look on
them a Crime; He presently set forth a light Vessel, to
find out the King of Achem's course, whilst he put
to Sea two great Carvels, and six Fly-boats to find out
the Enemy. Diogo Soarez de Mello with the two Galleys
we spake of came at this time into the Haven, as
if steer'd by our Fortune to help the Victory. Dom
Francisco d' Esa was nam'd Commander of this Squadron,
who,The Fleet goes out to find him. though ill fitted out, like one who hastens
to a suddain quarrel, put to Sea, with instructions, that
if in ten days he saw not the Enemy, he should return to
Port, not having Provisions for longer time.
         26. They Sail'd eight days without sight of the Armada,
and arriving at an Island had news the Enemy

was come to an Anchor at Queda,The Commander hears News of him, and resolves to follow him. a Voyage of two
days. Dom Francisco resolv'd to proceed, but the Souldiers
mutiny'd, alledging, 'twas like a raw Commander
to chase a flying Enemy; that their Provisions were already
spent; that they came not to Fight with Famine;
that if by the Governours orders they were limited to
ten days,The Souldiers mutiny. their Obedience would be better then the
Victory; yet Diogo Soarez de Mello,Diogo Soarez quels 'em. though Inferiour
in Command, higher in Authority, said, what Captain
soever tack't about, he would set upon him first, for he
should do the King better service in sinking disobedient
Souldiers then valiant Enemies. One fear thus laid
with an other, they set Sail for Queda, where they heard
the Enemy was in Port eight Leagues off, Dom Francisco
resolv'd, having him so near, to persue; here was
the Souldiers murmuring greater then before, though
less insolent, seeing the hazard of their fear out-go
that of the danger, so as they follow'd the Admiral
with greater signs of satisfaction then ever, either to
Gild over their former apprehensions, or their souls,
presaging the Victory, created more honourable affections.
         27. That evening they saw the City Parlez,They see, and set on the Enemy. where
the Enemy was at an Anchor, in a Bay form'd by the
River, at a little distance from the City. The Commander
of the Squadron made some of his sound the
River, and with Boughs laid out the Chanel, to avoid
the Shelves, and knowing by the soundings there was
water enough for the Carvels, lay in, as the Enemy with
two Galleys, and other Ships, was coming to find out
our Fleet; for he was told by his Spies, who from the
Shore had only seen the great Carvels, (the Fly-boats,
and Galleys being covered by the shelter of a crooked
winding Point made there by the River) there were
none but Merchant men. The Enemy had sent before
two Galleys, which were Convoys to a Fleet of Fly-boats,
and finding those Souldiers they imagin'd Merchants,
strove to tack about, but the River being narrow,

and they coming before the Wind, could not do
it, before we first came up with 'em; being in a little
time come to Grapling, the Arms and River were Dy'd
in Blood. Diogo Soarez with fifty Souldiers Boarded
the Admiral Galley,Diogo Soarez takes the Admiral. and found in the Moors such resolute
resistance, as all Dy'd, not one yielded, the rest
fought with as brave resolution. The Victory was
known by the Vessels, not by the Prisoners, it seem'd
by so honourable obstinacy that none would out-live
his freedome; the Enemies resistance was the proof of
our mens Courage, who fought not only with men
Valiant, but Desperate.
         28. The King of Viantana,The Embssage of the Confederates. and most of the Confederates
had in the mean time receiv'd so good satisfaction
from the King of Patane, as a Peace was ty'd
with stronger Knots, and knowing out Fleet was gone
to Sea, by that, concluding the Fortress was left without
sufficient Garrison, they design'd to try if that occasion
would make their way to free Malaca of so troublesome
a Neighbour, and made Bold by their hating us, and
Cowardly by their fear, they design'd in the semblance
of Peace, to disguise a Warr; they sent an experienc't
Commander to Simaon de Mello, to Condole with him
for the King of Achem's destroying our Fleet, and advise
him, that on the joy of the Victory he was joyning more
force to come upon the Fortress; that he having so
few Defendants, Courage must necessarily yield to multitudes,
since numbers and opportunities give Victories;
that as Friends to the State, they desir'd leave to Land
at that Port, and with their Lives redeem the Fortress
from so inevitable Ruine, that the World might see
they were better Friends in exigencies, then prosperity;
besides so Cautelous a message, the Envoy had instructions
to observe what Souldiers were in the Fortress,
and find out by the Governours countenance what
Courage or Fear he betray'd at the news of the loss of
his Fleet; the Heart being a more faithfull interpreter
of the affections, then the Tongue.
         
            
29. Simaon de Mello perceiving the offer Treachery,
and the Messenger a Spy,The Governour of Mlaca's answer. resolv'd to beat 'em at their
own Weapon, making use of Stratagem against Stratagem;
He gave 'em thanks for their offer of so seasonable
succours, and in return of so great friendship,
Challeng'd from 'em the usual gifts for good news, for
just then he had receiv'd fresh advice of the Victory his
Fleet had obtain'd against the King of Achem; and that
he had in the Fortress Men and Ammunition to spare,
for their service against their Enemies; that the King of
Achem went flying out of that Port; that in the persute
the Portuguese had some difficulty, none in the Victory.
These words were Credited by the security of the delivery,
and the Moor being Dismist, Credulous and Discontented
at the Governours resolution, and the Victory
of the Fleet, reported to those who sent him, that the
Governour either understood the design, or was above
the apprehension.
         30. Simaon de Mello as things stood was not a little
Disquieted,News wans from the Fleet. for the stay of the Fleet made the News
possible, and accus'd himself for being rash and inconsiderate,
to engage the strength of that place against an
Enemy, whose Peace brought us no profit, or Ruine
glory; for having overcome him, when we were Inferiour
in force, 'twould be but a small proof of our Valour
to worst him when equal; thus discourst the Governour,
as if without a fault there could be no miscarriage;
there were gone on the Fleet the Inhabitants of Malaca,
whose Wives, and Children, with untimely tears bewail'd
the Victory,The people complain. they knew not of; complaining of
the Governour, who with other mens Lives acquir'd
glory; when an honourable Peace was more suitable to
the States exigencies, then an unprofitable Victory;
the popular Tumult had grown to Libertinism, if Franciscus
Xaverius (whom India then honour'd as a Penitent,
the World now reverenceth as a Saint) had not
Bidled the people,Franciscus Xaverius quells 'em. by Preaching to them patience in
adversity, not only as a Virtue, but Remedy, cautiously,

but compassionately encouraging 'em, with the hopes of
better News, which then look't more like a Friends comforting,
then a Prophets prognosticks; when, on the day
of the Fight, as he was Preaching the ways of Life in the
presence of a great Multitude, he was suddainly rap't
into a profound Extasis, as taking in the Heavenly secrets
in a soft silence, till waking from the Mysterious
intermission of his senses, His pleasant Voice burst
forth,Fore-tells the Victory, in Commanding us prostrate before the Altars,
to give thanks to the Author of Victories, for at that
time had God with our Arms destroy'd the Enemies
Fleet; the people out of reverence to the Divine interpreters
fore-sight, with gratefull and pious tears prais'd
God in his Saint, from the extreams of grief beginning
a more secure content. That very Evening as he was
in a Chappel instructing the people,and the manner of it. he so particularly
related the passages of the Battail, as if acquainted with
the success from the Author of the Victory; we believe
the glorious Saint was the Intercessour, and Oracle
of this happiness, whose presaging Soul had by diverse
other Divine revelations a fore-sight into hidden secrets.
Malaca afterward enjoy'd an honorable Peace,
secur'd by the Victory we have related; but the Governour
in Goa with his Arms reaking in the Blood of
one Battail, was summon'd to an other.
         31. Martim Affonso de Sousa, (as we have said before)
left things, betwixt Hidalcaon and the State,
dispos'd for an open Enmity, in which Dom Iohn de Castro
could not refuse satisfaction without a Warr, or give
it, with his reputation. Upon the Moors retiring, the
Territories of Bardez and Salsete were under our Obedience,
and the fruits of Husbandry grew under the
protection of our Arms. Hidalcaon seeing the Land
before his face,Hidalcaon's perplexity. and that likewise the Injury was continued
in a Retention, by him counted unjust, did every
day by Arms mind us of his Title; alarm'd also by
Meale's being in Goa, (a Poyson which seis'd on the heart
of the Kingdome) and considering his stoll'n, and suddain

Inroads, more provok't then weakned the State,
and that by keeping from us Provisions, he impoverish't
his Subjects, and inrich't his Neighbours, from whose
Ports we were furnish't; He consulted how to set upon
us in open Warr, in which he would venture his Kingdome
and Person, leaving the fortune of a Battail to
decide the justice of his or our Arms; and being grown
Rich by Peace and Tyranny, the expence of that Warr
he was to make at his own Doors,He sends Forces on the main Land. was easie. He immediately
sent eight thousand Souldiers to get possession
of the Land in dispute, whilst more Forces were raising
to maintain what they recovered.
         32. The Governour on the first advice of the Inroad
sent Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire with nine hundred
Portuguese, some paid Canarins and a Troop of
Horse, to go meet the Enemy, staying himself in Pangim,
to come with the rest of the Forces to his Relief,
if Hidalcaon came in Person, a report cast out by the
Moors, which they would have perswaded us, or were
perswaded of themselves; Dom Diogo de Almeyda departed
with those men,Dom Diog de Almeyd goes out to him. and made a Halt at the Fortress
of Rachol, before which he had some light Scarmishes
with the Enemy, who would not engage, or accept
the Battail we offer'd, knowing perhaps we could not
endure a long Warr for want of Provisions, and inconvenience
of the ground, which was Marish and out into
Rivulets, where we could not Lodge dry, or make use
of our Cavallry in all places of the Campannia, in some
for the wet which hindered our passage, in others for
the unevenness; which were disadvantages more easily
Conquer'd by the Moors, who being Natives of the
place better knew the passes, and from their Birth were
us'd to the difficulty of treading the Boggs with nimbleness
and agility, besides being of the Country were
more plentifully provided. Dom Diogo seeing at last,
'twas at the Enemies choice to Fight or Retire,The Governour orders him to retire, and
that he wanted Provisions, advis'd the Governour, who
sent him Orders to retire with his men into the Fortress

of Rachol, whilst what was to be done was resolv'd.
         33. The Governour return'd from Pangim to Goa,
where he put to Council the State of things,and debaits the Warr in Council. and his
desires of quelling Hidalcaon with a sharper Warr to
avoid the troublesomeness of so repeated Inroads, so
to have his hands at Liberty to attend other business,
which he could not do, leaving so importune a Neighbour
arm'd, and unpunish't; yet all were of opinion to
diferr the Warr till a fitter opportunity, which would
be the next Summer, when our men might Encamp on
dry ground, and with more force, Recruited with the
Souldiers from the Kingdome, expected by the next
Ships; the design of Action not being haste, but Victory.
         34. The Governour though warlick,'Tis deferr'd till an other time. and impatient,
subjected his will to his understanding, expecting a time
to call Hidalcaon to a more severe account for his insulting;
which being agreed on, he ordered Dom Diogo
de Almeyda Freire to retire with his men, leaving a sufficient
Garrison in the Fortress of Rachol, so to bridle the
courses of the Enemy. The Governour indefatigable
in the exercise of Arms, being without a real War past
his time with the Representation of one. He every
day went in the Field,He exerciseth Warr in Peace. where he commanded the Souldiers
to throw the Barr, fence, form Squadrons, encouraging
some with Rewards, others with Praise, increasing
those Virtues by emulation and exercise; making a
quiet and politick Government; a School of Arms,
these were the Dances and Comedies, where the people
Recreated themselves with usefull and warlick passtime;
the frequency of these preludes so well Disciplining
the Souldiers, as no occasion of a real Warr,
no Accident,He countenanceth the Souldiers. or Alarm found 'em wanting. Passing once
through the Street call'd our Lady of Light, he saw in
a poor House quantity of Arms in a Press kept so clean
and bright, that their Lustre and Order in which they
were dispos'd so much pleas'd him, as stopping his Horse,

he ask't who Liv'd there; the Master himself hapned
to answer him, who was Francisco Goncalvez, a Souldier
of Fortune. The Governour, after commending his
curiosity, and well employing his time, commanded
thirty Pardaos to be given him to cleanse his Arms,
though in his Government there was but little time for
Arms to gather Rust.
         35. 'Twas now August, and the Governour, as foreseeing
future exigencies,Receives advice from Dio. lost no time in providing and
fitting the Fleet, when Francisco de Moraes Commander
of a Vessel arriv'd at the Barr of Goa, with Letters from
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, advising him, that the Sultan of
Cambaya had joyn'd all the forces of his Kingdomes, and
gave it out he intended to lay a second Siege before
the Fortress, that 'twas necessary this Summer to show
him our Arms, that being employ'd to secure things at
home, he might forbear his disturbance abroad, chiefly,
if our Fleets took from him, the liberty of Sailing, and
advantage of Commerce, he would be brought to see,
that his Peace with the State, was that on which depended
his prosperity.
         36. The Governour assembled the Magistracy of the
City,He communicates it to the Senate, and desires heir help. to whom he communicated Dom Iohn Mascarenhas's
Letter, desiring their help to quell, or reduce this
Enemy; though this contribution came immediately
on the former Loan, yet was the Governours proposition
so well taken by them all, as they offered him
Lives and Estates,They offer him their Estates, as if the States service had been the
Breeding, and Inheritance of their Children, India had
not so happy a time in the other Governments. Dom
Iohn de Castro desir'd of them ten thousand Pardaos,
which the people readily furnish't; and some rich Citizens
Wives,and the Women their Jewels. sent him a considerable quantity of Jewels,
with a Letter full of honourable Complaints, for his
not accepting and spending them, when first offer'd;
the Ladies of Chaul also, though second in example,
shew'd themselves more splendid in their Offer; yet the
Governour, sparing in the use and expence of so Loyal

presents, return'd them, with a gratefull acceptance,
paying them for so Liberal and Opportune a Service in
the honours conferr'd on their Husbands and Children;
He advis'd the Inhabitants of Bacaim and Chaul of the
Commander of Dio's intimation,He adviseth Chaul and Bacaim. of the charges of the
Fleet, and his necessity of their Assistance, who so willingly
comply'd with the King's occasions, as if they
took new occasions of danger and expence, in payment
of former Services.
         37. As the Governour was busie in itting and providing
the Fleet, he receiv'd News that two Ships from
the Kingdome who had Out-sail'd their Conserve were
come to an Anchor at the Barr of Goa. That year there
came from the Kingdome six Ships,Ships arrive from the Kingdome. without any to
command the Squadron; the Commanders of those
which arriv'd were Balthasar Lobo de Sousa, and Francisco
de Gouvea, of the four which were missing, Dom
Francisco de Lima in the Saint Philip, who came with a
Commission to be Admiral of Goa, Francisco da Cunha
in the Zambuco, these two departed late in the Year,
and arriv'd at the Barr the three and twentieth of September.
The Commander of the other Ship call'd the
Burgalese was Bernando Nazer, who Wintred in Sacotora,
and came to Goa the latter end of May. The other was
Commanded by Dom Pedro da Sylva da Gama Son to
the Lord Admiral, design'd for Malaca, and by the unskilfulness
of the Pilot lost amongst Agoxa Islands;
yet the men scap't, who got to Mocambique, and thence
Ship't on several Vessels came to India. These Ships
brought the Governour orders to enlarge the Fortress
at Mocambique,The orders they brought. upon the News of theRumes, are Natives of that part about Constantinople call'd Romania, (which the Turks now call Rumeli) from the priviledge granted by Pope Sylvester to Constantine the Great, upon his removing the seat of the Empire; to call Constantinople, Rome. Rumes coming
thither, and 'twas necessary to secure the Inhabitants,
and Port (which was the chief Scale of our Ships)
taking from the Enemy the possibility of hindering our
Trade with Sofala, and Cuama.
         
            
38. The Governour had three thousand Portuguese
Souldiers, and some Auxiliaries of Naires from Cochim,
the greatest Army he ever had in India, and considering
HidalcaonWarr resolv'd against Hidalcaon. (taking his opportunity when no Body was
left in Goa able to resist him) might in his absence
molest the State, He resolv'd to find him out in the Inland,
and force him to Fight; having for so necessary a
Warr, his time and strength Limited; He acquainted
the Magistrates of the City, and Heads of the Militia,
with this resolution, who all agreed in the seasonableness
of the occasion. The Governour more then ordinarily
quick in Execution, having his men ready, divided
the Souldiers (as the manner of India is) into five
Squadrons,The order of his men. commanded by his Son Dom Alvaro, Dom
Bernardo, and Dom Antonio de Noronha, (Sons to the
Vice-King Dom Garcia de Noronha) Manoel de Sousa de
Sepulveda, and Vasco da Cunha. Dom Diogo de Almeyda
Freire went also with two hundred Horse, and the Inhabitants
of Goa, to whom joyn'd themselves the Bores of
the Country, in all one thousand five hundred. Francisco
de Mello with three hundred Portuguese, and some
foot of the Natives, was Commander of the Fortress of
Rachol, to whom the Governour sent word to come
and joyn him at Margaon.
         39. At this time came Embassadours to Goa from the
King of Canara,Embassadours from Canara come to the Governour. desiring a League with the State, to
assist him in disturbing his Borderer Hidalcaon. This
Kingdome, is for the greatness of Empire, the most famous
of the East; for the story of its beginning, the
most fall'n, telling a thousand Apocryphal traditions,
which flattery makes use of to adore the Prince. The
Governour gave Audience to the Embassadours,He hears, and dispacheth the Embassadours. with
Ceremonies suitable to the King's ambition, and the
States grandeur; and immediately concluded a Friendship
on conditions honourable for both Crowns. Hidalcaon
understanding the Governours resolution,Hidalcaon retires his men. retir'd
his In-land Garrisons, as if avoiding the blow of
the first invasion, endeavouring to weary out the State

with a suddain and incursive Warr, to them easie, to us
intolerable.
         40. The Governour had intelligence the Moors were
got together at Ponda, protected there by the Artillery
of their Fortress; some of the Commanders were not
for the Governours following the Enemy who fled, this
opinion was Countenanc't by the most experienc't
Souldiery; but Dom Iohn de Castro, unwilling to put
on his Arms in vain,The Governour follows them. Commanded the marching on,
sing he would at his own Home chastise Hidalcaon;
this resolution was agreeable to the Souldiers who believ'd,
that in the Fortune of the General was much of
the Victory. The Camp that day march't two Leagues,
and was in the Evening in sight of the Enemy; who
with a Body of two thousand men, had made an halt
on the other side of a River to hinder their passage.
         41. Dom Alvaro de Castro who Commanded the Vanguard
leap't into the River,Dom Alvaro Fights in the Vanguard. at the same time Wading
and Fighting; the Enemy charg'd them with their
Musquets, and Kill'd some of his men, yet without
hindering, or retarding the rest who went forward;
most of the Commanders in diverse places past the River,
and gotten over found Dom Alvaro engag'd with
the Moors,The Moors fly. who already were so prest as to give ground;
for not intending to Fight in the open Field, we having
Conquer'd the River, they gave over opposing us, retiring
in good order to their Fortress of Ponda.The Governour commands his men to follow. The
Governour commanded his men to follow 'em, which
they did that day over Crows-feet, which Wounded
many; when come to Ponda, they saw all Hidalcaon's
Officers drawn up in a posture, to give or accept Battail.
The Governour keeping the same pace of his
March, commanded his men to fall on; the Moors seem'd
in their resolution to distinguish the person of Dom
Iohn de Castro, and as if yielding to the report of his
Name quitted the Field, where only his respect got the
Victory.They retire to the Mountain. The Enemy retir'd to the Mountain, where
the difficulty of the way kept off the persute. Dom

Alvaro went into the Fortress, which he found forsaken;
many mov'd for the sleighting it, but the Governour
voting more Haughtily, ordered that Refuge
should be left for the poor Fugitives. 'Twas done in
scorn, yet look't like compassion.
         42. The Land was once more under our obedience,
without a firm Peace, or continued Warr. Hidalcaan
was strong enough to hinder us of the Crop, but not
enjoy it; and now fought more for his Reputation
then the advantage of the Campagnia.He returns to Goa. The Governour
return'd to Goa, where the Fleet was ready to go Northward,
having no other place to rest in but the Sea, or
Field; and the season calling on Board, and success
satisfying the Souldiery, neither proclamation or diligence
was necessary for their Embarking.
         43. The Governour put to Sea with one hundred
and threescore Vessels,Goes again to Dio. Commanded by Dom Alvaro de
Castro, Dom Roque Tello, Dom Pedro da Sylva da Gama,
Dom Iohn de Abranchez, Dom Iorge of 'Eca, Dom Bernardo
da Sylva, Vasco da Cunha, Francisco de Lima, Francisco
da Sylva de Menezes, Dom Iorge de Menezes
Baroche, Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, Cide de Sousa,
Duarte Pereira, Diogo de Soufa, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora,
Dom Iohn de Attayde, Dom Iohn Lobo, Gaspar de
Miranda, Dom Bras de Almeyda, Iorge da Sylva, Dom
Pedro de Almeyda, Pedro de Attayde Inferno, Antonio Moniz
Barretto, Cosme Eanes Secretary, Melchior Correa, Sebastion
Lopez Lobatto, Antonio de Sa, Alvaro Serraon, Dom Antonio
de Noronha, Diogo Alvarez Tellez, Antonio Henriquez,
Aleixo de Abreu, Antonio Diaz, Balthasar Diaz,
Balthasar Lopez da Costa, Damiaon de Sausa, Manoel de
Sa, Fernaon de Lima, Alonso de Bonifacio, Antonio Rebello,
Antonio Rodriguez Pereira, Melchior Cardoso, Cosme Fernandez,
Nuno Fernandez, Francisco Marquez, Darte
Diaz, Diogo Goncalvez, Francisco Alvarez, Francisco
Varella, Luis de Almeyda, Francisco de Britto, Goncalo
Gomez, Gregorio de Vasconcellos, Gomez Vidal Captain
of the Governours Life-guard, Antonio Pessoa Purveyor

of the Navies Provision, Goncalo Falcaon, Goncalo de
Valladarez, Galaor de Barros, Gaspar Pirez, Iohn Fernandez
de Vasconcellos, Fernand' Alvarez, Iohn Soarez,
Ignacio Coutinho, Ioaon Cardoso, Ioaon Nunez Homem,
Ioaon Lopez, Lopo de Faria, Manoel Pinto, Lopo Soarez,
Manoel Pinheiro, Lopo Fernandez, Manoel Affonso, Marcos
Fernandez, Nuno Goncalvez de Leaon, Pero de Caceres,
Pero de Moura, Ruy Pirez, Pero Affonso, Pero Preto, Luis
Lobatto, Simaon de Areda, Francisco de Cunha, Simaon
Bernardez, Thome Branco chief Pilot of the Coast, Coge
Percoli Interpreter; the Ships also which came from
Cochim, were Commanded by our men; there were in
this Conserve some Ships of particulars, who out of
kindness to the Governour freely serv'd the State.
         44. The Governour with all the Fleet came to an
Anchor at Bacaim,Arrives at Bacaim. whence he sent some Spies to Cambaya,
to observe the Enemies force and design, whose
strength was in all those Ports talk't of with fear and
amasement, and the Guzarats out of pride, or credulity,
gave it out, the Sultan might at that time bring
the State under his Lash; here the Governour had
intelligence, that Caracem, Son-in-law to Coge-Sofar,
on presumption of the Neighbourhood of the Army,
was with a small Garrison in the Fortress of Surat;
Dom Iohn de Castro desiring to set on some of those
places which took shelter under the Enemy, sent his
Son Dom Alvaro with sixty Sail, to go up the River of
Surat,Sends Dom Alvaro to Surat. and to employ some Person of trust to observe
the state of the Fortress, or get intelligence with what
Provisions or Garrison Caracem was there, and if he
thought he could by Scaling take the Fortress, immediately
to give an assault, for by the print of his footsteps
he would come to his Relief.
         45. Dom Alvaro arriv'd with his Fleet at the first
Road lying in the mouth of the River,Dom Alvaro sends Dom Iorge before, and presently
sent off Dom Iorge de Menezes Baroche with six Fly-boats
to survey the Fortress. Dom Iorge went up the River,
Rowing softly, till coming in sight of the Fortress they

Shot at him; those in the Boats, either out of fear, or
caution, immediately went about, though Dom Iorge
hal'd 'em to stay. Here was the greatest danger where
none was apprehended; for from a Colony of the
Abessines, which lies upon the River, came repeated
Shot, which Dom Iorge observing went on Shore, and
entring the Village, gain'd the Guns of the Redouts
with so great courage and presence of mind, as to carry
'em on Board, maugre the resistance of those who came
to the rescue; this security heightned the opinion of our
strength, the Enemy perhaps measuring our force by
our daring.
         46. Dom Alvaro having sent Dom Iorge before with
the Fly-boats,and two other Captains. sent after him two more, Commanded
by Francisco da Sylva de Menezes, and Iohn Fernandez de
Vasconcellos, who desiring some intelligence from the
Shore, came to Anchor at a Road a little short of the
Colony of the Abessines; whence they sent off some
Mariners to water, who getting on Shore walk't about a
Canon-shot. Caracem, at the report of the Guns,
(which as we now said were Shot from the Abessines
Colony) sent five hundred Turks to their Relief, who
found the Posts lost, and the Guns on Board, and
Marching on were discovered by the Mariners who
were getting water, and gave the Alarm to Francisco da
Sylva that the Enemy appear'd, Francisco da Sylva,
seconded by Iohn Fernandez de Vasconcellos, went to
their Relief, and forming a close Body, invested the
Turks, and Routed 'em, some remaining Dead on the
place by the Shot of our Musquetteers. Dom Iorge in
his return,Their success. seeing the Boats at an Anchor, and our men
Fighting on shore, turn'd his Ships head to the Land,
and came seasonably to charge the Enemy, who retir'd
flying, leaving some of their Companions dead on the
place. This Victory cost us one Souldier.
         47. Our men got on Board,They return to Dom Alvaro. and in Company of Dom
Iorge went toward the Fleet, who reporting his success
and observations to Dom Alvaro, 'twas thought by the

Officers, the atchievement was not seasonable, the
Fleet being discovered, and the Coast alarm'd; only
Dom Iorge obstinately insisted, that they ought to fall
upon the Fortress, his height of mind being the best
argument; but the contrary opinion was so strongly
urg'd, that the most happy success could not have been
faultless.
         48. While Dom Alvaro was in the River of Surat,What the Governour did at Bacaim.
the Governour at Bacaim dispatch't diverse affairs, and
being Facetious as well as Valiant, gave out He was
going to surprise the Sultan in Amadabat, where in sight
of the Turks who guarded him he would roast him Alive,
and this report being, by so great Victories,History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 5. Cap. 7. credited,
'twas current amongst these timerous and credulous
Moors. The Governour to advance their fear or his own
gallantry, bespoke some great Spits, as one who in the
interval of more weighty business delighted in Witty
diversion. The Souldiers of those times us'd to wear at
their Girdles little bright Axes, which serv'd to cut the
Rigging and Tackling of their Prizes, as also to break
open Chests and Bundels, this was the true use, the first
a pretence. The Governour not liking Arms design'd
for so mean service, and seeing by chance Fausto Serraon
de Calvos a spruce Souldier, pass by with an Ax, told
him, that only a Sword became men of honour; Sir,
answer'd the Souldier, without this Ax your honours
Spits will be of little use, because we shall not be able
to Roast the King of Cambaya whole.
         49. The Governour went to joyn his Son at the
Barr of Surat,He goes to joyn his Son. where he had intelligence the Fortress
was Reliev'd; from thence with all his Fleet together
he went to Baroche, from that Port dispatch't Francisco
de Sequeins (Commander of the Naires of Cochim) to
sound the River, and see what was to be done, informing
himself by his sight of the conditions of the Fortress.
This Captain went up the River till he came in
sight of the Sultan's Army, which or'e-spread a very
large Plain; the report was, he had brought into the

Field two hundred thousand Souldiers; the truth is,
the multitudes were so great as to cover that and the
adjacent Campagnia. He reported what he had seen
to the Governour, who heightned to see himself so
fear'd, would for the credit of his own Fame face the
Enemy; He gave orders for the weighing of the Fleet,
and Sail'd up, till he cast Anchor in sight of an Army
whose numbers drunk up Rivers; and going on Shore,
laid out his ground and presented Battail to the Sultan.
So stout an Action, as amongst the most memorable of
the World ought not to be the second. The Sultan,
neither accepted or deny'd Fighting, but expected to be
fall'n on as well as found out; he saw the Governour,
but would not see his Sword. Dom Iohn de Castro,
hunting after new glory in extraordinary Actions, assembled
the Officers and Gentlemen of name, to whom he
spoke to this purpose.
         50. We have before us the greatest King of Asia,Makes a Speech to his men.
and greatest Army, Fortune is seeking out occasions
to make us glorious, that after this Victory, we may
lay up our Arms in the obedience of the East. I allow
the great inequality betwixt the Armies, but we
count not our Troops by number, but gallantry.
Those are the same we so lately beat at Dio, we need
not give 'em new Wounds, only make the Incision
greater of those which are yet open; their numbers
heighten their fear, seeing all ways of saving themselves
Obstructed: if but yesterday when they held
us Besieg'd they left us the Field, how will they stand
in our way when Victorious? They who have lost
their own honour, are but ill maintainers of their
Kings; our strength is greater then the Enemies, on
our side fight Fame and Victory; I believe there's
none here, who would part with his share of this days
glory.
         
         51. The Gentlemen and Souldiers disswaded the
Governour from so hazardous an attempt,The Gentlemens and Officers answer. for in so disproportionable
Forces the very Victory was blame-worthy;

that great men trusted more to Reason then
Fortune; that he should look to his preservation having
an over-plus of Fame; that 'twas enough to have
Landed, and on his own ground bid the Sultan Battail.
The Governour suffered himself to be overcome by
those Reasons, more apprehending the fault, then danger.
Dom Iorge desir'd five hundred Musquetteers with
them to Skirmish with the Enemy; but as they had put
by Dom Iohn de Castro's full Blow for the Battail, he
seem'd unwilling to give the Sultan so sleight a Wound;
He staid three hours in the Field without the Enemies
moving,He stays three hours in the Field, and goes on Board. then re-imbark't his Souldiers, so unscar'd and
full of security as if in one of the States Ports; the
most glorious Action we ever perform'd without
Blood.
         52. The Governour from Baroche crost over to Dio,The hurt he doth.
and sent some Ships into the Bay of Cambaya to destroy
those places on the Coast our Sword had pardoned;
these spoil'd the Gardens, and Groves of Plam-trees
Planted for the Inhabitants maintenance and recreation;
burnt store of Ships, pull'd down Stately buildings,
whose destruction and memory is yet preserv'd in
their waste Ruins.
         53. The Governour recovered Dio,Arrives at Dio. where the Commander
in chief came to receive him at the Sea-side,
and the Natives of the Island made Holy-day, as proud
to be under the subjection of so Valiant an Enemy.
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas put him in mind of the leave he
had obtain'd to go for the Kingdome,Dom Iohn Mascarenhas resigns the Government of the place. which the Governour
was unwilling to grant, nor could deny; some
Gentlemen had refus'd the Government of the place,
fearing, as appear'd, not to have the same opportunities
as their Predecessours. Lewis Falcaon, who came from
being Governour in Ormus, came then into Port, before
him had come to the Governour some complaints
of his Carriage, tolerable, because not discrediting the
Courage and Justice of his Government. The Governour
in private acquainted him with the accusations

laid to his charge by his Enemies, which as a Friend he
was willing to forget, could not as a Magistrate; that
he might by new Services silence all former miscarriages,
remaining in that Fortress, which had so on it the Eyes
of his Majesty and the whole World. Lewis Falcaon
accepted it,The Governour gives it to Lewis Falcaon. thanking the Governour for so honourable
Correction, offering besides to spend in the place
what he had got in Ormus, or possest in the Kingdome.
Dom Iohn de Castro, with signal favours, commended,
and provok't this Gallantry.
         54. Upon concluding the business of Dio, the Governour
set Sail directly for Bacaim,Sets Sail, the mischie he doth. going in sight of the
Coast of Por, and Mangalor, where he Burnt the Cities
of Pate, and Patane; the Inhabitants to avoid the Lash,
sav'd their Lives and part of their Estates in the Mountain,
wanting Courage or Conduct to defend themselves
or Dye in their Houses; one hundred and fourscore
Vessels which lay in several Ports were Burnt by
his Order, the poor owners with unprofitable tears
looking on. The crys and groans were heard at a
distance, and despis'd by Anger, and Victory. The Governour
gave order,His compassion. to spare some Old men, and Children,
who could not save themselves; Compassion,
importune to the Souldiery, pleasing to Humaity;
the Booty was given up to the Fire, the Prize not being
so notable, as the desolation; many other places on
that Coast, of no name, were Destroy'd; this Siege of
Dio being more famous for Vengeance then Victory.
         55. The Governour went from hence to Bacaim,He goes to Bacaim,
resolving to spend the rest of that Summer in the Warr
of Cambaya; thence he sent some Spies to observe the
March of the Enemy, who inform'd him, that in the
Court at Amadebat there was not a Family without
tears; and that the Sultan by a severe Decree had forbid
the mentioning the Siege and Battail of Dio, as if
Laws could command grief and memory. The Governour
heard by the same Envoys,is sensible of the not taking Surat, that the Fortresses of
Surat, and Baroche, were quitted at the sight of Dom

Alvaro's Fleet, and that he might by Scale have taken
them, had he not been hindered by the disswasions of
his Officers; which Dom Iohn de Castro took so to
heart, as if 'twere necessary to divine opportunities, and
his temper burst forth into words, which accus'd the
Commanders of the Fleet of neglect and remisness.
         56. The Governour employ'd the short Leisure he
had at Bacaim in writing for the Kingdome,puts the King in mind of those who had serv'd him. making so
honourable mention to the King of those who had
serv'd him, as amongst so many eminent Virtues, this
zeal, or gratitude seem'd to be singular, and the Souldiers
thereby improv'd in Courage, having security that
their General would not be wanting in his Zeal or Rewards.
         57. Hidalcaon considering that the States strength
was,Hidalcaon renews the Warr. though Triumphant, broken with so many Victories,
came in again to get possession of the In-land
with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, under the
Command of Casa Batecaon, a stout Turk born in Dalmatia,
experienc't in the Languages, and Discipline of
Europe; He without any opposition subjected the
Country, forcing some few of our Souldiers to retreat
to the Fortress of Rachol, who advis'd Goa of the strength
of the Enemy.
         58. Upon this advice, Dom Diogo de Almeyda, by
Counsel of the Bishop,The Commander at Goa desires to go against him. (then Governour) and of some
Gentlemen and Souldiers, resolv'd to dislodge the Moors
with the standing Militia, before they Encamp't themselves,
and increasing in strength and boldness fac't the
Walls of Goa, the Metrpolitan City. The men who
were to go with him being appointed and ready to
March, the Magistracy and Government of this City
came expostulating and protesting against their going;
that the Head of the State was not to be ventured on
so disproportionable Forces;The City hinders him. that the Governour was at
Bacaim with a Fleet full of Victorious Souldiers, able to
chastise the Enemy, against whom he would bring, as a
second Army, his Fame and Fortune.
         
            
59. The dispute continued so hot betwixt the Souldiers
and Citizens, as to come near Sedition,Adviseth the Governour. and Mutiny,
these standing for the preservation of the City,
the other on the reputation of our Armies; the difference
was at last decided and compos'd, that the Governour
being so near, should be acquainted with the
business, who understanding the Civil Government intermedled
in ordering the Warr, chid sharply their
animosity, allow'd and confirm'd Diogo de Almeyda's
resolution of finding out the Enemy, sending him orders
to stay with his men at Pangim, where he would in few
days joyn him.
         60. Dom Iohn de Castro had scarce laid down his
Pen,He immediately goes on Board. with which he writ for the Kingdome, when he
again took in hand his Sword; the same day he receiv'd
the advice, he commanded a great Gun to be Shot off
to warn the Fleet to be in readiness to weigh, and the
next, set Sail with the whole. Armado, and Coasting
went in sight of the City Dabul,Goes in sight of Dabul. famous for the marks
our Arms had before left there, and now the chief Scale
of Hidalcaon's Ports; at a distance were seen a great
many Gardens, Orchards, and proud Buildings, which
shew'd the Luxury and Grandeur of the Inhabitants;
the City contains about four thousand Families, hath
two Forts, and some Redouts which defend the entrance
into the Harbour, and though the Action requir'd
much Deliberation, the Governour resolv'd on
the undertaking.
         61. The Fleet that Evening went Coasting in sight
of the City, observing its Anchorage and Defence;
the next Morning by break of day the Governour commanded
his Son Dom Alvaro with two thousand men to
go into Boats and get on Shore,Dom Alvaro gets on Shore. he being one of the
first, who amongst many repeated Shot got footing;
here was the Enemies resistance in hindering, or retarding
our passage; the Battail was for some time without
inclining, the place and cause heightning their Bravery
in Fighting; the Crys of Women and Children

in their Ears, made them receive Wounds without
pain or fear; the Dead who fell were not an example
for their Fear but Vengeance. The Blood ran down on
both sides, and the resoluteness of both parties made
the success Contingent, when the Governour with the
rest of his men came in,The Governour follows him, and takes the City. and charg'd the Enemy so
home, as he began to abate in his Defence; they were
by degrees giving ground, till by a declar'd flying they
left us the Victory. The Governour mingled with the
Moors entred the City, where many Dy'd in sight of
their Wives they could neither forsake nor defend.
The slaughter was succeeded by Covetousness, the
Booty was not inferiour to the Victory; the Vessels of
the Fleet could scarce take in the pillage. The City in
a few hours was Consum'd by a Lamentable fire, its
deplorable Ruins once more preserving the memory of
this and a former Destruction. We lost in this Action
five Souldiers, the Enemy two hundred, the number of
the Wounded was greater.
         62. The Governour leaving the City in Flames reimbark'd,
and steer'd for Agacaim,Arrives at Agacaim. where he expected
Dom Diogo de Almeyda with one hundred and fifty Horse,
and the standing Militia, and with store of Barks to
pass the men; the Governour staid here one day, to
inform himself of the Enemies force, and design, and
on the next (the Apostle Saint Thomas's Eve) resolv'd
to fall on the Moors, and in the Battail invoke the name
of the Saint, not to deprive him of the honour of the
Protection of India, purchas'd by his Preaching, and
shedding his Blood on the Cross of his Martyrdome.
         63. The Enemy was quartered at a Town call'd
Morgaon, not farr from Agacaim;He falls on the Enemy. the Governour having
notice of it, form'd his men into two Battallions, he
gave the first to his Son Dom Alvaro de Castro, the Companion
of his Victories, with him were the Naires of
Cochim, and Citizens of Goa; the second (which he
kept for himself) was made up of all the Gentlemen
and Souldiers of the Fleet, who in their Wings had the

City-horse, in this order did he March, sending some
Horse before to discover the Camp.
         64. The Moors were spread without Order or Discipline,
as men who neither fear'd nor expected an
Enemy; some of their Souldiers, who went up and
down the Camp, spy'd our Colours, and by their sight,
or intelligence,They fly. knowing the Governour look't out for
'em, went in a fright to advise Cala Batecaon, aggravating
our strength, which their fear, and the distance
made greater. The Turk alarm'd at the approach of
so Victorious Arms, was not Master of more consideration,
then by his Flight to be an example to his men;
they left in their quarters, Tents, Provision, and Baggage,
and what meat was for Supper, then almost ready;
for the difficulty of our March a most necessary and
pleasant Booty. The Governour by this Flight began
to be in possession of the Land and Victory.
         65. The Moors went over a deep River, only to be
past by some Loggs of Wood laid across instead of a
Bridge, which the Enemy to hinder our persute cut in
pieces, yet in so much haste, as the Earth which fell
down, left open a passage, not without difficulty,
though without danger.Dom Alvaro, follows 'em. Dom Alvaro in this place set
upon passing the River, beginning to wade by few at a
time, as the straightness of the ground permitted.
         66. The Enemy was not so out of himself as to lose
the occasion of Fighting on so eminent advantages; He
turn'd with his men to the River,They turn. shewing us that so
cautious fear was Stratagem. The Moors charg'd our
men as they were passing, and so were timorous, few,
and disordered; The Governour, with his Voice, command,
and presence, encourag'd them to go over, but
fear o'recame their Obedience; the first turn'd back,
not without loss of Blood, and with worse marks then
their Wounds. At this time the Governour's impatience
attempted the River in different places. Dom Diogo
de Almeyda waded it with a Troop of Horse, finding
where he went better Foording, and Fortune, for he

fell in with the Moors General who was on Horse-back,
ordering and encouraging his men, whom he set upon
with great Bravery; The Turk with the shock fell to
the ground, but rising again without loss of his judgment
laid hold on his Semitar, and went after Dom
Diogo, who though he lost not his Saddle, was for a
while with the force of the Blow dis-inabled, but
coming again to himself the second time charg'd the
Turk,Dom Diogo kills the General. and (though two Souldiers endeavoured to rescue
him) left him with many Wounds measuring the
ground.
         67. The other Commanders, though with difficulty,
crost the River, put upon't by the Governours example,
whom they saw engag'd with the Enemy, and was more
envy'd then obey'd by his own Souldiers, who scattered
and disordered, some cautious, others heady cast themselves
into the River; but when all his men were over,
he so Vigorously charg'd the Enemy, as not able to endure
the shock of the Battail he gave ground.The Governour Fights, The
Governour, sparing no accident favourable to his Fortune,
so prest the Moors, grown fearfull and out of
order, as in a little time to Rivet the Victory.got the Victory. Few of
ours Dy'd, the Wounded were more; the Slaughter
was great amongst the Moors, and greater in the Chase
then Fight, for our men making no Prisoners, did with
the same stroke take off those who resisted or yielded.
Dom Alvaro de Castro by Commanding, and Fighting,
never more appear'd the Son of such a Father, then in
this Action; The other Gentlemen and Cavalliers so
equally behav'd themselves in their Courage, as not one
deserv'd to be nam'd second.On Saint Thomas's day, and by his mediation. By the calling on Saint
Thomas, and on his Day, was this Battail won, who gave
the Eastern Catholicks an eminent proof of his Patronage.
This so memorable Defeat is yet, so many years
afterwards, sung by the young Ladies of Goa, who in
the easiness of unforc't Verses, have invented Praise
without artifice or flattery.
         68. The Governour disbanded his men, and went to

rest himself at Pangim, excusing keeping Christmas at
Goa, in a just contempt of Palmes, and martial Triumpes,
since his Name was now in the Vogue of the
World above all other applause;He dispatcheth Ships for the Kingdome. here he dispatch't
the Ships of Burden which were to go for the Kingdome,
on which went Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, a Man
more constant in the difficulties of Asia, then in the
adversities of his Native Country;Dom Iohn Mascarenhas's praises. he was receiv'd by
the King and Nobility, with extraordinary honours,
yet were not his Rewards answerable to his Services;
He was of the Council of State to the King Dom Sebastion,
afterwards one of the Governours of the Kingdome.
He Marry'd Dona Elena Daughter to Dom Iohn
de Castellbranco, by whom he left a most Renown'd and
Loyal Posterity.
         69. Dom Iohn de Castro thought not Hidalcaon yet
sufficiently Curb'd by our Arms,The Governour carries on the Warr. and resolv'd with a
sharper Warr to bring him under; He secur'd with a
strong Garrison the Territories of Salsete, leaving there
Dom Diogo de Almeyda with six score Horse, and one
thousand Foot of the place, and ordered some Ships to
lye in the Rivers of Rachol, to defend the Neighbouring
Villages, the Labourers having quitted the grounds,
seeing their Dominion, by the fickleness of Warr, casual
and uncertain. The Governour also understanding
how easie it was to pull down a declining Kingdome,What hurt he doth.
carry'd on the Warr against Hidalcaon, desiring the
States Rivals might take warning by his Punishment;
He embark't those Souldiers he had always in readiness,
by being their Companion in dangers, and Father
in difficulties, and setting Sail, went along all Hidalcaon's
Coast, which he so impartially Destroy'd, as not
to leave one place to comfort an others miseries, none
was freed by their resistance, some by their distance.
         70. There was another Dabul call'd the upper,He destroys upper Dabul. two
Leagues from the Shore, which by its strength and distance,
was the Rich depository of a great many Estates;
but the protection of the In-land was not sufficient to

exempt it from the Fortune of the rest, for the Goververnour
march't to it, giving the first danger of the
Van-guard to his Son Dom Alvaro, (these were the
favours of that Father, and those times) who coming
to the place, found the Moors had secur'd their Persons
and Estates in the Mountain, nothing being left to recommend
the Victory; what was, serv'd only for Destruction,
for the Buildings which could be no Booty
pay'd fort by their Ruine. The Mosques and Temples
were thrown to the ground, and the Idols broke and
prostrate, our Anger not differencing stone from stone,
and the Moors and Pagans bewail'd with the same tears
their Gods and own miseries; The fury of our Arms
went to the Desolating the Campagnia,and the Campagnia. destroying the
Flocks, and Groves of Palmes, that the Warr might be
attended by Famine, a Sword not to be scap't by Flight
or Resistance. All was in fine so wasted, as the difference
between the Villages, and Campagnia, was not by
the sight, but memory.
         71. The Governour retreated to Bacaim,Goes to Bacaim. whence he
design'd his Arms for the Warr of Cambaya, setting forth
some Vessels to Endammage all that Coast, and make
Prize of the Meca Fleet, which came to an Anchor in
the Ports of that Bay;Spoils Cambaya. this was happily perform'd by
Dom Antonio de Noronha, and Dom Iorge Baroche, who
by their Prizes, and Victories, rais'd the States strength,
and reputation; our Arms in Dom Iohn de Castro's time
being so fear'd or respected, that most of the Princes of
Asia, Borderers, and Remote, became (to defend, or
secure their Kingdoms with the protection of our Forces)
by voluntary Obedience the States Tributaries;
of this truth the Kings of Campar, and Caxem were no
sleight Arguments.
         72. Our Chronicles (and Forein with greater
amasement) relate that famous Seige of Dio, held out
by Antonio da Sylveira, by whom the Turks Arms in
India receiv'd the first, or greatest Baffle;A Character of Rax Solimon. Their General
in this expedition was Rax Solimon, who, after the

loss of a great part of his Armado in the Siege,See Iohn de Barro's History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 4. for fear of
our Ships at Anchor in the Port, retir'd Flying, and left
on Shore his Baggage and Wounded; and seeing he
could not atchieve what he promis'd his Master, (whose
Pride, and Imperiousness us'd not to receive satisfaction
for miscarriages, or misfortunes) ventured, rather then
his Head,His coming to Adem. his Loyalty; He went into the Port of Adem
under Colour of Friendship, where the King sent to
Visit him, with Regallios and Refreshments from Shore,
but was cautious and vigilant to preserve the City, for
the Bashaw's Force and Loyalty was suspitious. The
Turk, who saw his Treason fear'd or discovered, design'd
to surprise the City by Scaling, but was afraid of the
Fortress of the place, and Courage of the Arabians,
and on that, had Recourse to an other Stratagem, more
base, and more secure, which was to excuse himself to
the King for not coming into the City, in fear to lose
the favourable Wind; that he desir'd to see him on
Board, for he was to communicate to him some business
from the Grand Signior to the great advantage of his
Kingdome. The poor King, facil, or credulous in the
good of his State, went immediately to meet the Bashaw
at Sea, secure in an innocent Conscience; but the
Tyrant forgetting Faith, and Humanity, made him with
Scoffs and Derision, (a cruel delight in so foul a
Treason) be Beheaded in the Galley.Beheads the King. 'Twas easie for
the Bashaw upon the Death of the King to seise on the
City, frighted and confus'd at the violent Murder of
their Prince; and because the Turkish Neighbourhood
cost the State blood, and trouble, we will in brief give
you this relation of the place.
         73. It is situate on the Coast of Arabia the happy,The situation of Adam.
in twelve degrees, and fifteen minutes of Northern Latitude,
protected by a little Mountain, which with some
Castles defends the entrance of the Harbour; it lies in
the mouth of the Straight, the Port bold, capable to
Anchor Ships of any burden, though expos'd to Westerly
winds, which are the Monsones in Summer. Art and

Nature have made it Tenable by Land, securing it from
the ambition of the Neighbour Princes and the incursions
of the Mountainous Arabs, who molest the Country
with troublesome Inroads; there is in the Port a
little Island, tolerably Fortify'd, call'd by the Natives
Cira, before it is an other safe Harbour, sheltered from
many Winds, where the Mecca Fleet use to come to an
Anchor. There are no Rivers or Fountains to water
the ground, it doth not sometimes Rain for two or
three years, whether it be the nature of the Clime, or
some hidden Judgment, so as they fetch their water
at a distance with Caravans of Camels. The chief Commodity
of the place is Rubarb, but that which brings
in most profit is the Anchorage of Ships which pass the
Straight. The Nation is Warlick and Cruel, goes
willingly to the Warr, though more for Plunder, then
Victory.
         74. The Bashaw having seis'd on the City,Soliman seiseth it. and seeing
himself, though an Intruder, obey'd, began with
diverse Oppressions to break the people, unarming 'em,
that their fear, and subjection might make them more
easily Govern'd; he Cut off, and Confiscated without
any reason those who were Eminent, their Lives
being a fault, their Estates a crime; the poor Peoples
suffering was more their Virtue, then Cure, for the
Tyrant was irritated at the so servile patience of the
innocent. Marzaon succeeded him in the Government
of the City, as also in his Tyranny, being so Cruel as
quite to wear out the patience of the miserable Inhabitants,
who resolv'd rather to endure him as an Enemy,
then Governour;The Inhabitants offer it to the King of Campar. They found out ways to offer their
City and Obedience to the King of Campar, saying,
they would with any Relief fall upon the Turks,
grown careless, in a peacefull and almost hereditary
Dominion, much more in their Contempt of those men,
who (as they thought) had lost all memory of their
Liberty, and Injuries.
         75. The Neighbouring King, with words full of

Compassion and Gratitude accepted the offer,The King  it, and what he doth. whether
out of ambition, or humanity; He selected out of his
Army, a thousand Souldiers well-deserving of so honourable
an Action, and would himself be their Companion,
and Commander; they began to March in the
silence of the Night, and being come to the City, the
Couspiritors possest 'em of a Gate, at which they entred,
makiug themselves with a weak resistance Masters
of the Castle. Marzaon with five hundred Turks Fortisy'd
himself in the Palace, more certain of the Danger,
then the Cause, and Authors; The first light discocovered
the King,History o India. Dec. 6. Lib. 6. Cap. 1. Commanding his men, who presently
dispatch't a Trumpeter to Marzaon, to tell him, he had
antient pretensions on that City, and now the Election
of the Inhabitants, who under the Oppression of the
Bashaw's intrusion, were so ty'd up in their Voice and
Liberty, as not to pronounce the name of their natural
Prince; that he came to their help as Sufferers, but
much more, as his own Subjects; that if he would leave
the City, he would use him as a Friend; permitting
him to carry away his Arms and Baggage, if not, Justice
and Victory should give him a double Title to his own
Subjects.
         76. The Turk finding out the conspiracy of the
Arabs,What the Turks do. and wanting Strength and Provisions for his
Defence, obey'd necessity, and March't out with Colours
flying and Drums beating, to possess himself of a
Castle eight Leagues off, designing from thence with
Relief from Bacora to reduce the City to its former
slavery; He began to fall upon the Caravans of Adem,
which furnish't the City, which receiving water, and
provisions from the Mountain, was in a few days brought
to great Streights; for if any Provisions came in, they
were few, dear, and stollen. The deplorable people
with tears in their Eyes weigh'd in the same Scale Famine,
and Tyranny, evils which only afford a miserable
Choise.They  Recruited. The Tyrant recruited his party with continual
supplies, which the King could not with equal Force

oppose, and discoursing with the Magistrates on the
ways of saving the City, they put him in mind of the
Fame of our Victories against the Turks, and our Fidelity
in protecting our Confederates.The Inhabitants send o Ormus. They resolv'd to
dispatch a small Bark to the Governour of Ormus, who
was then Dom Manoel de Lima, offering him a Fortress,
and the Revenues of the Custom-house, withall letting
us understand the danger the State would be in, if the
Turk got footing in the City.
         77. 'Twas reported Marzaon in a short time expected
considerable Relief from Balsora, and if forborn
till his Recruits arriv'd, would by open force fall upon
the City; on which the King of Campar shewing himself
a Souldier, in his Discourse and Courage, unwilling
that Stock should take faster Root, resolv'd with three
thousand Choise men to Besiege the Fortress, which
with greater Resolution then Fortune he engag'd in,
being Kill'd in the first assault. The Arabs seis'd with
fear at the Death of their King, left the Siege to Bury
the Body, though upon that oecasion, Revenge had
been more opportune then Piety.
         78. The Vessel which went for Ormus at the entrance
of Cape Rosalgate met with Dom Payo de Noronha,The Messenger meets with Payo de Noronha.
who with twelve small Galleys guarded that
Straight, and understanding the Arabs pretensions,
thought that Relief worthy some great Commander,
and writ to the Governour of Ormus, that if he design'd
not that honour for himself, not to refuse it him;
Dom Manoel sent him two Ships more, and some select
Souldiery, with them to go and secure the City whilst
he was making greater Levies, and after an honourable
reception, Counsel'd the King of Campar's Embassadour
to ask a Fleet of the Governour of India, who was one
would not deny protection to the States friends, especially
against the Turks whose Warr was look't upon as
the Inheritance of our Arms.
         79. Dom Payo arriv'd at Adem,Dom Payo arrives at Adem. where he was receiv'd
with what affection and greatness they could shew to

their own Prince, and the City delivered him, as Defender
and Governour; They planted our Colours, for which
all vow'd solemnly to Dye, letting themselves Blood in
their Breasts, Barbarous, but Loyal demonstrations and
ceremonies, protesting they would hold out the City
as a Member of the State, to which they were by obedience
Vassals; by affection, Children; but Dom Payo so
carry'd himself,
                himself . as to forfeit the reputation of our Arms
in the East; in favour to so great a Family we will omit
the particulars of the Story, though by an other Pen
written with more Liberty in ordinary History.
         80. The Citizens of Adem though ill protected by
Dom Payo,The Inhabitants send to Goa. lost not their devotion to the State, holding
out the City with only the name of Portugal in their
mouths; and either not having or not desiring other
protection, resolv'd to send one of the Blood-Royal to
the Governour, to advise him of their condition, on
whose extremities he might raise a new Name, by not
sleighting the glory of helping the afflicted; that the
Prince of Adem would receive Laws and his Crown
from the State, to whom he would turn Feudatary,
with a gratefull, and honourable Tribute.
         81. Dom Iohn de Castro was over-joy'd to hear, the
report of his Name and Victories,The Governour rejoyceth. reach't the Ears of
Princes so remote, heightning not only their Reverence
but Subjection; the message gave extraordinary content
to Goa, seeing their Governours fortune bring the
State the felicity of the first discovery of India, since
where other Arms were scarce heard of, his were Obey'd.
         82. The Governour gave the expedition to his Son
Dom Alvaro,Sends his Son. who had so well deserv'd in all he undertook,
as it look't not like the election of a Father, but
of a publick Minister; diverse old Cavalliers desir'd to
accompany him, whom the Governour by a modest
decree took off, commanding their stay in Goa, because
he should want 'em for more important business, yet
such was their eagerness on the expedition, as they look't

on the decree as a common grievance; the fault of
those times seem'd to be the ambition of dangers; the
Governour satisfy'd 'em, and was content to see such
Emulation begot under his Discipline.With what Fleet. He presently
gave order for the Equipping and Victualling thirty
Galleys, and made Commanders of 'em, Dom Antonio
de Noronha, Son of the Vice-King Dom Garcia, Antonio
Moniz Barretto, who went Governour of the Fortress
to be made in Adem, Do Pedro d' Eca, Dom Fernando
Coutinho, Pero de Attayde Inferno, Dom Ioan de Attayde,
Alvaro Paez de Sottomajor, Fernaon Perez de Andrade,
Pero Lopez de Sousa, Ruy Diaz Pereira, Pero Botelho
Porca Brother to Diogo Botelho, one of the Infante Dom
Lewis's Family, Alvaro Serraon, Luis Homem, Melchior
Botelho Over-seer of the Revenue, Gomez da Sylva, Antonio
da Veiga, Luis Alvarez de Sousa, Ioaon Rodriguez
Correa, Diogo Correa, who came with the Embassadour
of Adem, Diogo Banho, Pero Preto, Alvaro da Gama, and
others.
         83. But few days before the Fleet weigh'd,An other Embassage from Caxem. came to
Goa an Embassadour from the King of Caxem, from
whom his Neighbours the Fartaques had usurp't a considerable
part of his Kingdome; He reigning on the
Southern Shore of Arabia, and knowing Adem was to be
reliev'd by our Armado, concluding that with the same
Fleet we might restore him, writ to the Governour,
that the Restitution of Caxem would not be less Laudable
in the World then the defence of Adem; Represented
what secure entertainment our Fleet had found
in his Ports, reckon'd up those which at several times
had Anchor'd there, on which he was suspitious to the
Turk, offer'd also besides his Loyalty a reasonable
Tribute. The Governour, considering that by those
succours our Arms came into repute,The Govenour's answer. and got friends
to the State, ordered the same Fleet should countenance
Caxem; the atchieving both the one and other
design being but the same Voyage and expence; and
because the Siege of Adem stood in need of speedy

supplies, the Governour fore-seeing the main Body of
the Fleet would arrive too late, and so frustrate the
aim and design, sent away Dom Iohn de Attayde with
four Vessels to make his way into Adem, and hold out
the Siege till Dom Alvaro's arrival. Dom Iohn de Attayde
set Sail, the fresh North-west Winds endammag'd
one of the Ships, which arriv'd shattered, the rest persu'd
their Voyage.
         84. The Besiegers and Besieg'd in the mean time
fought resolutely in Adem,
               . drawing Blood on both sides;
The weight of the Warr light upon some Portuguese
of Dom Payo's Fleet, who shew'd from a mean Origine
glorious Courage, so engag'd in the resistance, as if they
had defended their own Country, not a strangers Dominion;
these suffis'd to retard for many days the Turks
Victory, and being Souldiers of Fortune, our Chronicles
in ungratefull silence obscure their Names, as if Virtue
of necessity were to have noble Progenitors, and these
were for their own Actions less honourable then others
for other men's; I believe the great Ones have with injuring
Nature set up new Laws, not making only Estates
but Deserts hereditary.
         85. Things in Adem being (as we have said) in that
Contingency,
               . there appear'd a Fleet of Turks of nine
Galleys Royal, and some small Vessels, which fac't the
City, and coming to Anchor out of the Bay, got to
Shore, where they Pitch't their Tents and Fortify'd
their Encamping, advising the Bashaw to joyn 'em with
his Army. The Arabs on sight of so great numbers
come against 'em, came remissly to the Defence, some
Pusillanimous, others out of Heart, thought the Courage
and Strength of the Enemy insuperable, and at
private meetings blam'd the King's amition of dilating
his Crown with the Blood of his innocent Subjects,
not content with the fortune of his Predecessours; but
the Portuguese amongst 'em, observing the brightest
Fame work't out of difficulties, forc't on the Arabs,
convincing the Resistance to be necessary and possible,

offering themselves afresh to be the voluntary Companions
of their Fortune; enough to put new Courage
in 'em, upon which they vow'd to Dye in their defence,
not so much out of Obligation as Example.
         86. The Turks Besieg'd the City,Lay Siege. by raising two
Batteries with pieces on 'em of an extravagant bigness,
two amongst the rest (by them call'd Quartaos) carry'd
a Bullet of four Palmes circumference, which made
more Ruins, then Breaches in the Walls, and from the
danger taught the Besieged discipline; who made their
Retrenchments and Traverses within, by which they
entertain'd, and blunted their assaults, and made the
Turk's Victory doubtfull,Dom Payo calls off our men. and costly. But Dom Payo
de Noronha (carry'd away by some resolute fatality)
depriv'd the Arabs of the Victory, ours of the Honour,
sending private Orders to all the Portuguese to
come and joyn him, thus forsaking the defence of a
Prince, a Friend, and Feudatory, not complying with
the obligation of either his Birth o Office. Most of
the Portuguese obey'd, only Manoel Pereira, and Francisco
Vieira, two Souldiers of Fortune, said, the City
was the Kings of Portugal, and they would lose their
Lives in the defence; it appears, the Warrs of those
times seem'd to require first Courage, then Discipline;
these two held out the City till the last day, and gain'd
more repute in its Ruins then the Turks in their Victory.
         87. As soon as the Arabs understood the Portuguese
were Retreated,What the Arabs do. (all hopes of Defence being desperate)
they began to parly; but the Prince commanded
'em to give over Treating, saying he had rather be
beaten out, then give up the City; that the Turks
should not without some stains of their Blood, win
those Colours of the Kings of Portugal. Loyalty which
deserv'd better Assistance from our Arms. The Enemy,
knowing the Division and Coolness of the Inhabitants,
continued his Assaults, which brought on again the
Speech of a Surrender, which the Prince always broke

off, constant to himself, and the State; but danger,
famine, and despair, prevail'd with some of the Inhabitants
to give up a secret Gate to the Enemy, at which
he entred the City. The Prince fighting with Royal,
but Unfortunate courage, disengag'd with his Life, the
Loyalty he had promis'd to the State; Manoel Pereira,
and Francisco Vieira, sav'd a young Prince whom they
carry'd to Campar, comforting the Subjects with that
tender branch of its prostrate Trunk.
         88. Dom Iohn de Attayde,Dom Iohn de Attayde's success. (whom we left with three
Ships at Sea) continued on his Voyage, and having favourable
Winds, in few days saw the Coast of Arabia;
He stood for the City Adem, and Rowing into the Harbour,
got amongst the Galleys which were there at
Anchor, but the Easterly winds yet reigning, got out to
Sea again. The Turks on the sight of our Ships immediately
weigh'd, and by the advantage of their Oars
gave us so hot a Chase, that the two Ships commanded
by Gomez da Sylva, and Antonio da Veiga, were almost
under the Prow of their Galleys, and seeing it impossible
to fly, much more to resist, ran their Vessels on the
Shore which was near them, and by that means scap't
with their Lives. Dom Iohn de Attayde who was in the
best Ship, bore up what he could against the Wind;
seeing himself often lost, till by the Night coming on
he stood for Abexim, under which Shore he carin'd his
Ship in the Island of Mete, which lies o're against the
Cities of Barbara, and Zeila; those who sav'd themselves
by Land got to the protection of the King of
Campar, where they found Manoel Pereira, and Francisco
Vieira, who acquainted them with the success we have
now related; they were entertain'd and provided of
all things with plenty and affection.
         89. Dom Alvaro de Castro seeting Sail with the
whole Fleet, and going before the Easterly winds,Dom Alvaro's Voyage. made
a short Voyage, and got so farr as to recover the Islands
of Canecanim where he met with Dom Iohn de Attayde
of whom he knew the loss of Adem, and how the Turks

chas'd him, from whose Galleys he had by the favour
of the Night freed himself. Dom Alvaro with the
Gentlemen and Souldiers of the Fleet, betray'd a just
resentment at the News, valuing less the loss of that
State, then the foil of our Arms, because both amongst
Natives and Strangers the sinking in opinion is always
Eternis'd. The King of Campar's Embassadour, and
Brother-in-law, who was in our Fleet, becomingly resented
the Deaths of his Brother-in-law, and Nephew,
yet was not a little comforted with the knowledge they
were not in Arrerages to Honour or Loyalty, and on
those considerations shew'd as strong a mind, as if he
had been to calm an others sorrow. Dom Alvaro consulted
with the Officers of the Fleet what was to be
done,He calls a Council, and what he resolves. and all were of opinion, since the relief of Adem
had been ineffectual, to divert their Arms in favour of
the King of Caxem, (as the Fleet had instructions) on
whom the Bordering Fartaques had surpris'd the Fortress
of Xael, which commanded a Haven, the principal
Scale of those few that petty King had; a design more
advantagious then difficult.
         90. Dom Alvaro commanded to Steer to Xael,Goes to Xael. and
coming to Anchor in sight of the Castle, the Fartaques,
out of either fear or friendship receiv'd peaceably our
Armado; The Fort was Built of Turfs, with four so
little Works, as five and thirty Souldiers, who were
there in Garrison, were enough to Man it; These men
on sight of our Fleet, sent out a Woman (who understood
and spoke Portuguese) to ask for the Commander
in chief and tell him, the Fartaques were friends to the
State, that if we came to demand that Fortress, they
would immediately quit it; many concluded the proposition
acceptable, for of so few Enemies and without
Name we could not expect Glory, or Booty; most
Voted, that for the Authority of our Arms we should
summon 'em to Surrender on discretion. The woman
well understanding this resolution, and ill satisfy'd with
our answer, reply'd, that the Fartaques knew how to

defend both their Lives and the Castle. The Moors
upon that took down the white Flagg, and planted
an other Red one, Ours immediately discharg'd some
Canon-shot, but so at Rovers as to do no Dammage;
Dom Alvaro, with all his men surrounded the Fortress,
which he commanded should be Scal'd in diverse places,
securing those who went on with his Musquets from
below; and the charge being uninterrupted the Moors
durst not appear.Resolve to Scale it. Fernaon Perez was the first, who began
with a Ladder to clime, carrying with him his Colours
which he planted and maintain'd on the Wall;
almost at the same instant got up Pero Botelho, with the
same hazard and fortune as the former, these clear'd the
Scaling for the rest.
         91 Antonio Moniz Barretto, Dom Antonio de Noronha,
Dom Iohn de Attayde, and others, went to a Gate of the
Fortress, which was stopt up with Bushes, and found it
impossible to enter, till our men went on the inside and
dis-ingag'd it; the Fartaques retir'd to two Works,
whence with desperate Courage they defended themselves,
refusing their Lives offer'd 'em by Dom Alvaro,
which they seem'd willing to lose out of revenge,The Arabs  till thy all Dye. or to
credit that force they could not resist; stoutness being
even amongst these Infidels the most Cardinal virtue.
The Moors in fine fought till they all fell, such Barbarous
obstinacy not deserving the name of Courage,
where there was no hope of Victory or Revenge; of
our men five Dy'd, the Wounded were above forty.
         92. When the Fortress was gain'd,The place is gin'd. (an action more
considerable to the Prince, then famous for us) Dom
Alvaro delivered it to the King of Caxem's Embassadour,
who shew'd then his gratitude for so signal a favour,
in Victualling the Fleet, afterwards, in holding
faithfull correspondence with the State; and the Season
of the year being almost spent, Dom Alvaro went to
Winter at Goa, where he was receiv'd with applause
above the Victory, a Ceremony, the Governour indulg'd
as a Father, and Dom Alvaro pris'd as a Souldier.
         
            
93. Lourenco Pirez de Tavora came with five Ships in
Company to the Barr of Lisbone,Lourenco Pirez arrive at Lisone. having had not only
a short, but happy and prosperous Voyage; we told of
Dom Iohn Mascarenhas's coming on them, full of fame
and deserts; the news of Dio being immediately spread
amongst the People, every one, according to his capacity
judged of the patience of the Siege, and resolution
of the Battail.History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 6. Cap. 7. The common people were endless in
the praises of Dom Iohn de Castro, as men without envy
for persons, or fortunes, above 'em; the Gentlemen, and
great Ones, abetted or consented to the universal Acclamations;
an unusual virtue, to be able to endure the
fame of Peers; and there was not one so ambitious,
who coveted for himself a greater Name, or more illustrious
Atchievements.
         94. The King and Court put on their Robes,Rejoycing fo the news of Dio. and
appointed a day to give God thanks in the Chapel with
Pious and Royal offerings; there was a Learn'd Sermon,
in which were set forth the Praises and Virtues of the
Governour. The King acquainted the Pope, and the
greatest Princes of Europe with the Victory, who all
gave him joy as for the most famous Action of the East;
Dom Iohn de Castro in his Letter to the King desir'd
leave to return to the Kingdome, shewing how little
Sollicitous he was of Dignities,What the Governour asks for the good News. who left the greatest,
and that a total neglect might not be branded as a new
ambition, begg'd of the King two Acres of ground which
joyn to his Country-house at Sintra, and end in a little
Hill, which to this day is call'dThe Mountain of good News. Monte das Alvicaras.
The King in the honours conferr'd on him, seem'd to
consider his Services, and in his Reward respected his
Fortune, all which is seen by his Letter, of which we
here give you a Copy.
         
            
            The King Dom John the Third's
Letter.
            95. VIce-King and Friend, I the King heartily
salute you.The King' thanks to him. The Victory God gave you
against the Officers of the King of Cambaya, was of
as eminent satisfaction to us, as 'tis fit we should have
for such, and so great a Conquest, and for so great
mercies and favours,History o India, Dec 6. Lib. 6. Cap. 8. as you in it receiv'd from our
Lord, for which he is to be ever prais'd; there is also
much due to the Prudence, and great Courage you
shew'd in that day, as to what you did in the great
and speedy Relief you sent to the Fortress of Dio,
exposing in so extravagant a Season your Sons to Sea,
by which is seen how much more predominant our
Service is with you, then the natural affection of a
Father, which we value, as 'tis reason we should, seeing,
you not only Routed so great Forces of the Enemies,
but secur'd all India, y the great apprehensions
our Enemies have of so signal a Victory; which service,
there is as much reason we should Rank as it deserves,
as we should have for it the requisite satisfaction;
we had no little discontent for the Death of
your Son Dom Fernando, both as he was your Son,
and as he gave proofs in that Age, what he would have
been in all his Life after; and since he Dy'd so honourably,
and in so eminent service for God, and us,
you ought less to resent his loss, and give God thanks
he was pleas'd he should so Dye, as we know you did,
shewing, by your forgetting the Death of your Son,
your remembring what was suitable for our Service,
of which things we shall always be so mindfull, as not
only to impute 'em to you by our great satisfaction
for 'em, but by our special grace, which is now to have
a beginning in the rewards we conferr on you and
your Son Dom Alvaro, reserving the compleating

of 'em for the end of your Service, which we are
confident, and take for granted, will be such, as that
hath been you have already rendered us, and in the
confidence and experience we have of it, though very
much desiring at present to comply with you in all
things, yet considering how much it is for our Service,
(and seeing by your Actions how much more you prise
that, then all other business of your own) we have
thought good not to give you leave to return as you
desir'd of us; and for that purpose recommend to,
and command you, to receive it well, and that you
will serve us in that Charge other three years, at the
end of which we will in God's name send you leave
to return, and we hope he will inable you so to
do; yet though it be so much for the advantage
of our Service, that you should continue serving us
for that time in those parts, if you think your return
necessary, we should be glad of your writing to us,
and expecting our answer. 
            
            
               Pero de Alcacova Carneiro
writ it in Lisbonethe 20th. of October 1547.
               
               The King.
            
         
         I believe the Queen Dona Katherine's Letter, requires
our no less attention, where the Subscription is
not only Royal but also the Discourse, giving judgment
on the Actions of the Victory, with the Prudence of a
Man, and Gallantry of a Souldier.
         
            The Queen Dona Katherine's Letter.
            96. VIce-King, I the Queen heartily salute you.
I have read your Letter in which you give
us a particular account of what you have done, and
ordered in all those things you thought to be for the
service of our Lord the King, and for the defence and

security of those Parts, and that all was so conformable
to what you are, and to the opinion his Majesty
hath of you, we have as much satisfaction, as 'tis
reasonable; both to see his Majesty is so well serv'd by
you, and for the signal honour you have purchas'd.
As to the great care and diligence, you upon your
Arrival employ'd in the repairing, and providing the
Fleet, 'twas a great beginning, and of absolute necessity
for the remedying so weighty affairs as afterwards
presented; and we are assur'd how great soever
the pains you took in it were, your content of having
been so well employ'd, will be greater; you aim'd
right in the Warr you made upon Hidalcaon, because
by that was clearly seen the contrary to what you say,
is there the receiv'd opinion; that he could receive
no harm by a Warr with the Portuguese, (which must
be the reason he so often begun it) nor have any
benefit by Peace with 'em, which made him not care
to break it; and if he knew who you were, and how
much more prevalent honour then profit is with you,
he would not have made you the offer he did about
Meale, but the little impression it had on you, and
your evident undeceiving him, will make him know
it. As to the business of the Siege, and Warr of the
Fortress of Dio, the mercy of our Lord God was
eminent in the Victory he there gave you against so
great Force, and numbers, of the Enemies of his holy
Catholick faith, as were there from so remote Parts
met together, and 'tis an evident sign of his own Arms
upholding the State in those Countries; and for all,
we give him the praises, as are reasonable, and we acknowledge
to be due; and it much adds to the great
satisfaction, our Lord the King, and We have for so
great a Victory, to see with what prudence, and conduct
you provided all things necessary for the obtaining
it; how stoutly you behav'd your self in the day
of Battail, and with what diligence you reliev'd that
Fortress, exposing for it your Sons in so Stormy weather;

the Notion his Majesty and we have of all
these Actions, and of the great benefit which is the
consequence of 'em, is very proportionable to their
quality and greatness; and we hope his Majesty will
shew it so, in the honour and thanks he intends to return
you, because all is your due; and he gave no
small sign of it, by his pleasure and satisfaction immediately
to begin it, as you will see by his Letters to you
and your Son Dom Alvaro. We were not a little discontented
at the Death of your Son Dom Fernando, as
well for our knowledge how you must take it, as for
the loss of his Person, which (as he shew'd in that
Action) was eminently great; but we so well know
you, and your great Prudence and Virtue, as to be
certain, that at whatsoever time our Lord God should
take him to himself, you would conform to his Will,
and accept it at his Hand; especially it being then,
when for the defence of his Faith, and in so signal
Service for his Majesty, he Dy'd so honourably, and
was not wanting to the Obligation of being what
he was, which are very convincing reasons that you
ought so to take it, and very much less resent his
Death. As for what you sollicit us in, about your
return, in which your Wife Dona Leonor (whom we
were very joyfull to see, for the deserts of her Person
and Virtues, and out of the great affection we have
for her) hath spoke to us in your behalf, as in a business
she so much desires, we should be very glad if
we could in that gratifie your self and her with the
good liking and satisfaction of our Lord the King;
but for the good Service you have done his Majesty,
and the great miss might be there of your Person
in such a time, he hath thought good to make use of
you there for three years longer, as you will see by his
Letter; and we assure our selves, that for those considerations
you will take it well, and we very much
desire you it may be so, and hope in our Lord he will
give you health and vigour to perform it, and will

assist and strengthen you in all your difficulties, because
the result of 'em is so much for his Service, and
he knows the main design his Majesty hath in desiring
it should be so, is because of his knowledge that his
Service will by you there be unfeignedly promov'd;
and by your remembring, amongst so many troubles
and so important businesses, those things of Ours, you
took into your care, it is evident, how great a desire
you have in that, and all other things to serve us,
which we so look upon as is reason; for what concerns
Diogo Voz we have in an other Letter writ to you,
what we desire should be done. We were very much
pleas'd with that perfume of Benjoim de Boninas, and
with all the other things you sent us by Lourenco Pirez
de Tavora, all being so good, as they seem to be sent
with that good Will which we esteem the most, and
take all very well of you; and about those Servants
of Ours, and Persons, who, (as you write us) have
serv'd well there, and about those things, you think
it necessary to provide, we will mind our Lord the
King, as you desire, it should be done. That which
his Majesty hath to look too, in the Rewards he
ought to bestow on all those who have there ferv'd
him, is to take notice of what you have writ to him,
and of what you desire, as 'tis reason he should; we
take very well of you, the good Character you give
his Majesty of those our Servants, who were present
at the Action of Dio, and also the many Favours, and
great Civilities, we know for our sake you shew'd
them.
            
            
               Pero Fernandez writ it in Lisbone the 30th. of
October 1547.
               
               The Queen.
            
         
         The Letter the Infante Dom Lewis writ him, is not
less considerable, as being from a Prince who knew how
to make so profound an estimate of Deserts and Virtues.
         
            
            The Infante Dom Lewis's Letter.
            97. HOnourable Vice-King. I receiv'd your
Letter which came in Lourenco Pirez de
Tavora's Fleet, in which you tell me you receiv'd mine
I sent by Lewis Fiqueira, and I take very well of you,
your telling me, the advice I gave you seem'd good
to you, and the more, your putting it in practice,
and, though I had not known you, I had sufficient
cause to believe it was so, by hearing what you do
there, and seeing you write so plainly your difficulties,
Poverty, and Abstinence, weapons by which are o'recome
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, who reign
so absolutely in those parts of India, a Victory, greater
then that of the King of Cambaya, or of all the
Force of the Turk; for which as long as you Live
you ought to fear nothing, but be confident in our
Lord God, that he will assist you, as he hath lately
done in the Defence and Battail of Dio, for which
Victory you have great cause to praise him, who hath
made you an Instrument of so much Service to himself,
and to my Lord the King, of so much honour
to your Self, and to all the Portuguese, to the absent,
as to those who were present. And certain it is, that
in that expedition, from the first day you had the
News of the Siege of Dio, till that of yours and our
Victory, (according to my reach) you have done
what could be done, by a Stout, and Prudent Commander,
as well in your speedy Succours, as in exposing
your Sons as the marks of Fortune, to the dangers
of the Winter and Seas of India, that others
might less apprehend 'em, by which is clearly evinc't,
how much a greater share the Service of my Lord the
King, and the Obligation of your charge, have in
you, then the natural affections of a Father, which
are those most Tyrannically over-rule our Nature.
And by the patience you shew'd in the Death of your

Son Dom Fernando de Castro, you have eminently
clear'd this opinion. It's certain I resented it for my
self and you, and by the certain signs I saw in him of
an extraordinary Courage took it for a very great
loss; and believe God design'd in that to recompence
him, by taking him out of this so troublesome Life
by so honourable means, and so much for his glory,
which ought to be no little part of your Consolation.
Your Son Dom Alvaro de Castro employ'd not his time
ill when through so many difficulties, and dangers he
reliev'd the Fortress of Dio, at that time, when its
only remedy was his Arrival, and, for his Behaviour
there, his falling on the Enemies Posts, and all the rest
of his Carriage, I do for my self, and you, give him
many blessings. And to return to your resolution of
venturing your Person, and the State of India, for the
relief of Dio, 'twas well taken, for had you not done
it, there had been the same hazard; and your arrival
at Dio, your ordering your Fleet, your commanding
the Landing of your men when the Battail was to be
given, and your way of Fighting, all this seems to
me to deserve that we now and ever give praises to
our Lord God, and that his Majesty should conferr
on you many honours, which he hath already begun
as you'l see concerning your Self and Son; He also
ought and will do the same to those Cavalliers, and
Gentlemen, who serv'd under you in that expedition,
especially to Dom Iohn Mascarenhas, who behav'd
himself in the weight of that Siege like an honourable
Commander, and brave Cavallier. I was very
glad to see your manner of writing to his Majesty,
about the Service the Gentlemen, and Cavalliers who
went thither, did in the business of Dio, by which it
appears, you even scores with their deservings. Always
do so for my sake, and be glad to praise Persons;
for it being certain, there will not want those men
who will speak ill of them, (which you ought to
punish where you find it) it is but reason the good

should extoll them, that those you cannot there
Reward, his Majesty may by your information do it.
I spoke (as you writ to me) about your return,
which his Majesty granted me not, and gave me for it
two Reasons, and in my opinion, though you have
many to countenance your desire of returning, his
Majesty hath many more to desire your Service for
three years longer in that Government, which you
ought to be glad to do, to serve God, for the great
mercy he shew'd you, and his Majesty for his confidence
in you, and satisfaction in your Service; Rely
on God for his giving you strength to grapple with
the great difficulties and disorders of India, and I
trust in him, that after such a performance you'l return
to fill these tops of the Rocks of Sintra with
Chapels, and Trophies of your Victories, and that
you'l visit and enjoy 'em in a profound repose. I
speak not to you about particular businesses, because
my Lord the King hath writ to you in what concerns
his Service in answer to the general Letter
you writ him, which came in a very good style, and
well digested.
            
            
               Dated at Lisbone the 22th. of October
1547.
               
               The Infante Dom Lewis.
            
         
         98. 'Tis apparent by these Letters how well the
Royal Family took the Services of Dom Iohn de Castro,
the King deny'd Dom Iohn the leave he ask't to come
and rest himself in the Kingdome for the good of his
Country and the East, he added to his Government
three years more, with the Title of Vice-Roy. He
Liv'd not to enjoy, though deserve, this addition of
honour; He had given him ten thousand Crusades, as
a Gratuity towards the Defraying charges, and Letters
Patents for his Son Dom Alvaro to be Admiral of the
Seas of India, an employment he Computed by fewer
Years then Victories.
         
            
99. The King Dom Iohn by the advices of the Vice-Roy,
understood, that the security of India requir'd
always Forces ready, for all occurrences of the State,
and that the defeat of Cambaya, (whose Ruine was an
example for the rest) had created hatred as well as
reverence in the Neighbouring Princes; on these and
other considerations he sent this year for India six Ships,The King sends six Ships for India.
which parted in different Seasons. Martim Correa da
Sylva, who brought a Commission for the Fortress of
Dio, was Commander in chief of the first three which
parted in November, the other Commanders were Antonio
Pereira, and Christovaon de Sa; The Admiral Ship,
having on the Coast of India adverse Winds fell off from
her course, and not able to reach Goa, recovered Angediva,
whence she sent to the Vice-Roy to provide her
with necessaries, being forc't to Winter in that Port.
Christovaon de Sa's Pilot knew better to shape his course,
for as soon as he made the Coast of India, he bore up
to get the Wind of Goa, and saw Land about Carapataon,
whence he came directly for the Barr.
         100. As soon as the Vice-Roy knew there was a
Ship come in from the Kingdome,One come to Goa. he gave orders for
Landing the Sick, and went in Person to visit and provide
for 'em. And certain it is, that amongst all the
Excellencies of this extraordinary Vice-Roy, we may
Rank his Charity in the Front, it not being a Customary
virtue in a Souldier, much less in a publick Minister;
He receiv'd his Letters, in which he found those
honours and gratuities we have related, these he look't
upon as payment, those as a recompence, for which the
Gentlemen gave to each other the joy, as satisfy'd the
Vice-Roy should continue his Government three years
longer, in whom they knew the State would have a
Man, the Soldiery a Father.
         101. Dom Iohn de Castro found himself less spent by
his Years then the Difficulties of so long a Warr,The Vice-King falls Sick. which
made him succumb under the pressure of so perplex't a
Solicitude; He fell Desperately ill, and his Sickness in

few days betray'd mortal Symptoms, which he, by the
Vexatiousness of repeated accidents perceiving, unburdened
himself of the weight of the Government:
He call'd for the Bishop Dom Iohn de Albuquerque, Dom
Diogo de Almeyda Freire,Quits the Government. the Doctor Francisco Toscano,
Chief Chancellour of the State, Sebastiaon Lopez Lobatto
his Auditor General, and Rodrigo Goncalvez Caminha,
Overseer of the Revenue, to whom he delivered
up the State, in Peace with the Neighbouring Princes,
secur'd by so many Victories. He sent for the Magistracy
of the City, the Vicar General of India, the
Guardian of Saint Francis, Frier Antonio do Casal, Saint
Francisco Xaverius, and the Officers of the King's Revenne,
before whom he made this Speech.
         102. I am not asham'd Gentlemen to tell you,He speaks to the Council. that
the Vice-Roy of India wants in this Sickness those
conveniencies the meanest Souldier finds in the Hospitals;
I came to Serve not to Traffick in the East, I
would to your selves have pawn'd the Bones of my
Son, and did pawn the hairs of my Beard, to assure
you I had no other Plate, or Hangings. There was
not this day Money enough in the House to Buy me
a Hen; for in the Fleets I set forth, the Souldiers fed
upon the Governours Salary, before the King's pay,
and 'tis no wonder for the Father of so many Children
to be poor. I request of you, during the time of this
Sickness, to order me out of the King's Revenue a
proportionable maintenance, and to appoint a Person
of your own who may provide me a moderate allowance.
And asking presently for a Missal, he took his
Oath on the Gospel,The Oath he takes. he was not then Debitor one
Crusade to the King's Revenue, or had receiv'd any thing
from Christian, Iew, Moor, or Pagan, or for the carrying
out the Authority of his Place, or Person, had any other
Houshold-stuff then what he brought from Portugal,
and that he had here spent the Money he had got in the
Kingdome; that he had not where withall to Buy an
other Quilt, then that they saw on his Bed; that he had

only made a Sword for his Son Dom Alvaro to return
into the Kingdome, and set the Hilt with some Jewels
of small value. That he desir'd they would enter a
Protest of this, that if at any time the King found it
otherwise, he might punish him for perjury. This
Speech was writ in the City-Books, which, they who
succeeded might read for their Instruction, with whom
I believe the Memory is more pregnant then the Example.
         103. As soon as the Vice-Roy perceiv'd himself summon'd
to a sharper Conflict, avoiding the importune
diversion of Human cares,He reres with the Father Xaverius. he secluded himself with the
Father Saint Francisco Xaverius, providing for so doubtfull
a Voyage so secure a Pilot, who all the time of his
Sickness, was his Nurse, Reconciler, and Governour;
As he had got no Riches to make a new Disposal of, he
made no other Will then that he left (at his coming
to Govern India) in the Kingdome, in the hands of
Dom Rodrigo Pinheiro Bishop of Angra, to whom he had
Communicated it; and receiving the Sacraments of the
Church,His Death. he gave up his Soul to God the sixth of Iune
one thousand five hundred forty eight, in the eight and
fortieth Year of his Age, and almost three of his Government
of that State. The Riches he gain'd in Asia
were his Heroick actions, which Posterity will read in
this Book with a tender Memory. In his Study were
found three pieces of small Money, and a Discipline
which seem'd to have been often us'd, and the Locks of
his Beard he had pawn'd; He ordered his Body should
be Deposited in Saint Francis Church in Goa, thence
to be Translated to his Chapel at Sintra; They immediately
consulted on his Funeral,His Bril, and the grief at it. which was to be not
less Compassionate then Solemn, deserving the Illustrious,
and common Tears of the whole State.
         104. After some years his Bones came to the Kingdome,His Bones come to the Kingdome.
where they were receiv'd with reverent and pious
applause, as being the last benefit his Country receiv'd
with his Ashes, and on the Shoulders of four of his

Grand-children carry'd to Saint Dominicks Convent in
Lisbone,Are Deposited in Saint Dominicks in Lisbone. where for many days were made costly Exequies;
thence they were the second time Translated to
Saint Dominicks Convent at Bemfica, where (though
in an others Chapel)Translated to Bemfica. they remain'd some years in a
decent Depository, till his Grand-child Francisco de
Castro, Bishop, and Inquisitor General, made for them a
Chapel, and place of Burial; for Design, Matter, and
Adornment, but to the King's Monuments, not second
to any; the relation of it will not perhaps seem tedious,
out of respect to the Memory of the Grand-father, and
Piety of the Grand-child.
         105. Saint Dominicks Convent of Bemfica is two
Miles from Lisbone,Where they now are. nam'd so, from a Neighbouring
Village. 'Twas always in the possession of the Kings of
Portugal, where for the freshness of the Air, they had a
Country-house, which they went to for Diversion of
business, or the exercise of Hunting. King Iohn the
First, finding himself indebted to God for so many Victories,
amongst other Acts of Thanksgiving, gave this
Palace to the order of Saint Dominick, with the Adjacent
grounds, Gardens and Orchards, the twenty second of
May, one thousand three hundred ninety and nine, for
the Founding a Convent, which was not only Founded
but Augmented by our Kings. The Founder oblig'd
himself, by his Letters Patents (preserv'd in the Archives
of the Convent) to protect, and defend the cause, the
persons, and goods of the Religious, Sollicitous in God's
cause, Couragious in his own. King Iohn the Second
endow'd it with a great Revenue, which the House
now enjoys under the Name of the Fifth of the Islands,
without imposing any new Obligation, which might
render the Alms less Liberal, or Acceptable; the King
Dom Emanuel, though Distracted with greater Cares
and Buildings, left in the Sacrifices of this Temple, a
Religious memory, ordering that twice in a Week should
be Sung two Masses to the Angels, in the behalf of those
who were at Sea; this was in that Age the Astrolabe

of his Discoveries, and the Abetter of the Victories in
the East. The Queen Dona Katherina, look't upon this
House as her private Chapel, offering here from her own
Oratory, Reliques of Veneration, and Value, amongst
others, in a great Silver Cross a piece of the holy Cross,
which offering from Royal hands doth assure the Certainty
of so inestimable a present; Our Princes conferring
on this House temporal and spiritual benefits.
King Philip the Second, augmented with an honourable
Alms, those it before enjoy'd. This Convent hath
always been for the strictest observers of the Religion,
who under the name of Recolets allow no Swerving
or Indulgence from the first institution; hither as to a
School of Virtues, use to retire the most eminent of the
Order, some to avoid, others to be at rest after their
Prelacies, in a holy leisure to be untaken up but by God,
and to reform their Affections.
         106. In this Convent, Illustrious for its Foundation,
and Discipline, rest the Victorious Ashes of Dom Iohn
de Castro, in a Chapel, and Monument of a Religious
greatness. The Chapel is Consecrated by the name of
Corpus Christi, hath the great Door into the Cloister
of the Convent, and over that in a Scutcheon of Relieve
the Arms of the Founder; the wideness of the
Door takes in forty Palmes, the height above seventy,
a proportion the Architects name Dupla, and the work
is Dorick. 'Tis only of one Isle of polish't Marble, the
Pavement also is of diverse Colour'd and Polish't stones;
there goes about it within, a well-orderded, and proportionable
Pedestal, which sustains the Decency of an
uniform Building; it contains six Arches (with Pilastres
between) upon their Bases, and with their Capitals;
there goes also a Cornish round about, it hath six Windows,
proportionable to the rest of the Architecture.
On the high Altar is a Tabernacle, (in which is always
kept the blessed Sacrament, lighted by two silver
Lamps) behind it an Altar-piece, both of Carv'd work,
with great Flowers all Gilded, and on the top, a

Picture of our Saviour's last Supper; behind the high
Altar, and Altar-piece is the Quire for the Novices, for
whose better Breeding, and Service of God, is made a
House with twenty Cells, and diverse Offices which
form the Body of a distinct Convent. The Roof of the
Chapel above the Finishment of the Cornish is also of
Stone, divided into Compartments with rich Mouldings.
Of the six Arches which make the whole, the two
first are on the plain of the Altar; on the Gospel-side
is a Door goes up to the top of the Building, and the
Founder's Lodgings; on the side of the Epistle, is an
other goes into the Sachristy. The other four are taken
up with four costly Monuments, with Urns of Burnish't
stones which rest on the Backs of Elephants of black
Marble.
         107. In the first Arch which joyns to the plain of
the Altar, on the Gospel-side is the Monument of Dom
Iohn de Castro, in which before 'twas clos'd were laid his
Bones with the following Epitaph.
         D. JOANNES DE CASTRO XX.
PRO RELIGIONE IN UTRAQUE
MAURITANIA STIPENDIIS FACTIS;
NAVATA STRENUE OPERA
THUNETANO BELLO; MARI
RUBRO FELICIBUS ARMIS PENETRATO;
DEBELLATIS INTER
EUPHRATEM ET INDUM NATIONIBUS;
GEDROSICO REGE,
PER SIS, TUR CIS UNO PRAELIO
FUSIS; SERVATO DIO, IMO
REIPUB. REDDITO, DORMIT
IN MAGNUM DIEM, NON SIBI,
SED DEO TRIUMPHATOR, PUB.
LICIS LACHRIMIS COMPOSITUS, PUBLICO
SUMPTU PRAE PAUPER TATE
FUNERATUS, OBIIT VIII. ID. JUNII
ANNO 1548. AETATIS 48.
         
            
Under the Arch adjoyning to this, rest the Bones of
his Wife Dona Leonor Coutinho.
         108. On the Epistle-side of the Altar, under an
Arch over against that where is Dom Iohn de Castro's Monument,
rests his Son Dom Alvaro, where his Bones
were put in the same manner, on him is writ this following
Epitaph.
         D. ALVARUS DE CASTRO MAGNI
JOANNIS PRIMO-GENITUS, CUI
PENE AB INFANTIA DISCRIMINUM
SOCIUS, PUGNARUM PRAECURSOR,
TRIUMPHORUM CONSORS, AEMULUS
FORTITUDINIS, HAERES
VIRTUTUM, NON OPUM: REGUM
PROSTATOR: IN SINAI VERTIGE
EQUES FELICITER INAUGURATUS;
A REGE SEBASTIANO SUMMIS
REGNI AUCTUS HONORIBUS;
BIS ROMAE, SEMEL CASTELLAE,
GALLIAE, SABAUDIAE LEGATIONE
PERFUNCTUS, OBIIT IV. KALEND.
SEPTEMB. ANNO 1575. AETATIS
SUAE 50.
         In the next Arch to this lies his Wife Dona Anna de
Attayde, under the Body of the Chapel is made a Vault,
with six stone Arches, in one of which is an Altar to
celebrate Mass, the rest have Repartments for the
Bones, and Bodies of the Dead.
         109. The Bishop, Inquisitor General, Founder of
this Chapel, gave (for the maintenance of those Religious
who are to perform the Duties of it) to the
Convent of Bemfica two hundred and forty thousand
The Portuguese keep their accounts in the least Money they have, which are Reis, whereof 400. made a Crusade, which is worth 3 s. 6 d. Reis yearly, to be paid out of the Chamber of this
City of Lisbone, which are thus distributed. One hundred

and twenty thousand Reis for three Masses to
be daily Celebrated; fifty (though given before) for
the Anniversaries he shall appoint in his Will; forty; for
the Fabrick and providing the Chapel; thirty, for
supplying the necessities of those Religious men who
reside in the Novicate for the looking to, and cleaning
the Chapel; which besides this, he Adorn'd with
many rich and devout Pieces, and gave to the Sachristy
all things necessary for Divine Worship, as well Ornaments
for Holy-days as Work-days, Linning, Candlesticks
of all sizes, Lamps, and other such like necessaries,
all in aboundance and perfection.
         110. Dom Iohn de Castro,Dom Iohn de Castro' Family. as Illustrious for his Family, as
Virtues, was Born in Lisbone the 27th. of February of the
year one thousand five hundred; He was second Son to
Dom Alvaro de Castro, Governour of the House of Civil,
and to Dona Leonor de Noronha, the Daughter of Dom
Iohn de Almeyda second Earl of Abrantes; Grand-child
to Dom Garcia de Castro, who was Brother to Dom Alvaro
de Castro, the first Earl of Monsanto, these two were Sons
to Dom Fernando de Castro, Grand-children to Dom
Pedro de Castro, and great Grand-children to Dom Alvaro
Pirez de Castro, Earl of Arrayolos; and first Constable
of Portugal, Brother to the Queen Dona Inez de
Castro, Wife to King Dom Pedro the Cruel. This Constable,
was Son to Dom Pedro Fernandez de Castro, call'd
(in Castile) the Man of Warr, who coming into this
Kingdome, begun here the Illustrious house of the
Castros, which hath preserv'd it self in so much greatness;
Dom Pedro by the Male line descended from
the Infante Dom Fernando, Son to King Dom Garcia of
Navarre, who Married Dona Maria Alvarez de Castro,
the only Daughter of the Earl Alvaro Fanhez Minaya,
the fifth Grand-child in descent from Lain Calvo, from
whom this Family derives its beginning. Dom Iohn de
Castro when very young Marry'd Dona Leonor Coutinho
his Cousin-German once remov'd, greater for her
Quality, then Portion, with whom retiring to the Town

of Almada, he by an Antidated old Age avoided the
ambition of the Court; He went to serve at Tangiers,
where he gave the first, but extraordinary proofs of
his Courage, though of his Actions there, we have more
from his Fame then our Knowledge. He return'd to
Court, re-call'd by the King Dom Iohn the third, and
the Kingdome being too narrow for his Gallantry went
to India with Dom Garcia de Noronha; He accompany'd
Dom Estevaon de Gama in his expedition to the Mouth
of the Red-Sea, and made a Journal of his Voyage, a
usefull and acceptable work to Sea-men. On his return
to Portugal he retir'd to his Country-house at Sintra,
recreating himself by Reading, in his Solitudes, and
employments always Exemplary; He put on his Sword
again to follow the Eagles of Charls the Emperour in
the Battail of Tunez, where he rais'd his name with new
Glory; when this design was over, hiding himself
from his own Fame, he again retir'd to Sintra, knowing
how to avoid, not keep himself from employments.
The King Dom Iohn made him Admiral of the Navy of
the Coast, a Service where his Courage was answered
by Success; He went last of all to Govern India, where,
by the Victories we have related, he secur'd, and brought
into reputation the State. When the designs of Warr
spar'd him, he in a large Card describ'd all the Coast
betwixt Goa, and Dio, marking the Flats, and Shelves,
the height of the Pole in which the Cities lye; the
depth of Water, Anchoring, and Creeks which form
the Havens; the Trade-winds, and Nature of those
Seas; the force of the Currents, the swiftness of Rivers,
disposing the Lines in different Tables, all, with
so minute and exact Geography, as only this Work
might serve to make him Famous, if he were not so
eminently, for his great Fortitude. He look't the same
in his streights at Home, and prosperity in the East, appearing
always the same Man in diverse Fortunes; his
Ambition was to deserve all things, and ask nothing;
He equally did reason and justice to all men, unbyast in

his Punishments, but so Justifiable, that the Complaints
were more against the Law then Minister. He
was free to the Souldiers, sparing to his Children, shewing
more civility in his Office, then Nature; He us'd
with a great deal of Ceremony the Actions of his Predecessours,
honouring even those he put not in practice;
without prostituting his Civility, he preserv'd his Respect.
He appear'd above the Great ones, and Father
of the Meanest; such was his Life, as by that, more then
by Punishments, he reform'd extravagancies; his first
Zeal was always in God's cause, then in the States; he
past no Virtue without Reward, some Vices without
Punishment; amending not a few, some by Favours,
others by Clemency.Iohn de Barro's Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Pag. 4. The presents he receiv'd from the
Prince of Asia, he put to the King's Revenue, a Virtue
all prais'd, few imitated; the maimed Souldiers found
him Sollicitous in their Cure, and Compassionate of
their Condition; He oblig'd every one, yet seem'd obnoxious
to all; He kept the Souldiers (as what would
prove the Ruine of the State) from Merchandizing;
He set upon no Action, which he did not atchieve,
being ready in Execution, mature in Counsel: amidst
the employments of a Souldier, he preserv'd the virtues
of a Religious man, was frequent in visiting Temples,
a great honourer of Church-men, mercifull and liberal
to the Poor; had great Devotion to the Cross of
Christ, which he Reverenc'd in its Figure, by a low
inclination without any difference of time or place;
and so Religiously was he fir'd with the Worship of this
most holy Representative, as he rather chose to Build a
Temple to its Memory, then raise a House to his Posterity,
leaving it on his Fatherly blessing to his Son Dom
Alvaro, that if he found in the favour, or justice of the
King, any recompence for his Services, he should with
that Build a Convent for the Franciscan Recollets in
the Mountain of Sintra, and name the House The invocation
of the Holy Cross. Dom Alvaro de Castro, Heir
apparent to the virtues of so pious a Father, gave order

for Building the Convent, not so great for the Majesty
of the Pile, as for the Sanctity of the Penitents who Inhabit
there. Being the first time sent from King Dom
Sebastian Embassadour to Pope Pius the Fourth, he
obtain'd of him to priviledge the Altar of the Convent
for all Masses, and on the day of the Invention of the
Cross, Plenary indulgence to all those who pray'd for
the pressing necessities of the Church, and designedly
for the Soul of Dom Iohn de Castro; so singular and unusual
a grace as we have not known granted to Soveraign
Princes. It is apparent, the Fame of his Victories
was as loud in Italy, as that of his Virtues, attested by
so Illustrious a testimony from the Vicar of Christ; for
these and other Virtues we believe he now enjoys in
Heaven nobler Palmes in a more eminent Triumph. He
had three Sons,His Children. who all expos'd themselves to the dangers
of Warr, as their Fathers blessing; Dom Miguel
the Youngest, who in the Reign of King Dom Sebastian
went to the Indies, and Dy'd in the Government of
Malaca; Dom Fernando burnt in the Mine at Dio; Dom
Alvaro,The praise of Dom Alvaro de Castro. with whom he seemd to share his Palmes and
Victories, the Son and Companion of his Fame, who
returning to the Kingdome without any other Riches
then the Wounds he receiv'd in the Warr, Married
Dona Anna de Attayde, Daughter to Dom Lewis de Castro
Lord of the House of Monsanto; He was a particular
Favourite to King Dom Sebastian, entrusted by him in
the greatest Affairs and places of the Kingdome, went
on diverse Embassies to Castile, France, Rome, and Savoy:
Was of the Council of State, and sole Superintendent
of the Exchequer, and in the midst of so
eminent Offices, Died Poor, though
he Deceast a Favourite.
         The END.
      
   
   
      
         
         An Index of the Most Observable
things in this History.
         
            A.
            
               
                  Adem.
                  A City of Arabia, the Situation, lib. 4.
num. 73. pag. 242.
                  Rax Soliman seiseth on it by Treachery, lib. 4.
num. 74. pag. 243.
                  Is succeeded by Marzaon ibid.
                  The Inhabitants offer it to the King of Campar
ibid.
                  He desires aide, and offers a Fortress there to
Dom Manoel de Lima, lib. 4. num. 76.
pag. 245.
                  The Inhabitants receive Dom Payo de Noronha,
who comes to relieve them, lib. 4.
num. 79. pag. 245.
                  Being forsaken by him, they give notice of it to
the Governour, lib. 4. num. 80. pag. 246.
                  The Gallantry of some Portuguese in this Warr,
lib. 4. num. 84. pag. 248.
                  The Turks besiege the City, lib. 4. num. 86.
pag. 249.
                  They enter by Treachery, lib. 4. num. 87.
pag. 250.
                  How the Arabbs forsaken by us, behave themselves,
lib. 4. num. 87. pag. 249.
               
               
                  Dom Affonso de Noronha.
                  Governour of Ceita, lib. 1. num. 25. pag. 13.
He receives Dom John de Castro with great
ceremony, lib. 1. num. 30. pag. 17.
               
            
            
               
                  Agacaim.
                  The Governour Dom John de Castro arrives at
the City, lib. 4. num. 62. pag. 237.
                  Falls upon the Inhabitants, lib. 4. num. 63.
pag. 238.
                  They fly, lib. 4. num. 64. pag. 238.
                  Dom Alvaro de Castro persues them, lib. 4.
num. 65. pag. 238.
                  They face about, lib. 4. num. 66. ibid.
                  Their General falls, lib. 4. num. 66. pag.
239.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Alvaro Bacaon.
                  Admiral of the Emperours Navy, lib. 1.
num. 25. pag. 13.
                  Visits Dom John de Castro on Board, lib. 1.
num. 28. pag. 15.
                  They discouse about the Fight ibid.
                  Resolve to engage ibid.
                  Dom Alvaro changeth his Opinion, lib. 1.
num. 28. pag. 16.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Alvaro de Castro.
                  Goes to the Indies with his Father, lib. 1.
num. 17. pag. 8.
                  Is Knighted by Dom Estevaon da Gama,
lib. 1. num. 20. pag. 10.
                  Returns with his Father to the Kingdome,
lib. 1. num. 21. pag. 10.
                  Goes to relieve Alcacer Ceguer, lib. 1.
num. 30. pag. 17.
                  Goes again to India with his Father, lib. 1.
num. 37. pag. 20.
                  Goes against Hidalcaon, lib. 1. num. 59.
pag. 38.
                  Sets Sail with six Ships, lib. 1. num. 60.
pag. 38.
                  The prize he takes ibid.
                  After destroying the City of Cambre, returns
for Goa, lib. 1. num. 65. pag. 42.
                  Goes with relief to Dio, lib. 2. num. 88.
pag. 108.
                  The Commanders who go with him ibid.
                  The difficulties of the Voyage, lib. 2.
num. 122. pag. 127.
                  Is forc't back to Bacaim ibid.
                  Sets forth from thence for Dio, lib. 2.
num. 125. pag. 130.
                  Is forc't back again, lib. 2. num. 156. p. 148.
                  
                     
Sets Sail again, and puts in at Agacaim,
lib. 2. num. 158. pag. 14.
                  Takes a Ship belonging to Cambaya ibid.
                  Arrives at Dio with forty Ships ibid.
                  His reception by the Commander ibid.
                  Takes his Post on the Work, where his Brother
Dom Fernando was Kill'd, pag. 150.
                  Adviseth his Father of the state of the Fortress,
lib. 2. num. 159. pag. 150.
                  Is against the Souldiers Sallying forth on the
Enemy, lib. 2. num. 162. pag. 152.
                  But seeing their resolution bears them company,
lib. 2. num. 163. pag. 152.
                  His Courage and Discipline, lib. 2.
num. 166. pag. 153.
                  He gets upon the Wall, and being hurt with a
stone falls down as Dead, pag. 154.
                  Refuseth a great Ransome offered him by Rumecaon
for a Janizary Captain, lib. 2.
num. 179. pag. 161.
                  The Governour, being arriv'd at Dio, gives
him 800 Portuguese for the Fight, lib. 3.
num. 14. pag. 178.
                  His Courage in the Action, lib. 3. num. 17.
pag. 183.
                  The danger he is in, lib. 3. num. 22.
pag. 185.
                  He enters the City, pag. 186.
                  The Governour his Father makes him a Commander
against Hidalcaon, lib. 4. num. 38.
pag. 226.
                  He fights in the Van-guard with extraordinary
Courage, lib. 4. num. 41. pag. 227.
                  Makes the Enemy fly ibid.
                  Goes to Dio with his Father the Governour,
lib. 4. num. 43. pag. 228.
                  Goes to Surat, lib. 4. num. 44. pag. 229.
                  Sends Dom Iorge de Menezes to get Intelligence,
lib. 4. num. 45. ibid.
                  And after him other Commanders, lib. 4.
num. 46. pag. 230.
                  He enters Dabul, and takes the City, lib. 4.
num. 61. pag. 236.
                  He sets upon the Enemy in Morgaon, lib. 4.
num. 63. pag. 237.
                  They fly, and he persueth, lib. 4. num. 67.
pag. 239.
                  He destroys an other City call'd Dabul, lib. 4.
num. 70. pag. 240.
                  Goes with relief to Adem, lib. 4. num. 82.
pag. 240.
                  The Fleet he carries, 247.
                  The success of the Voyage, lib. 4. num. 89.
pag. 250.
                  Calls a Council, and what is resolv'd, pag.
251.
                  Falls upon Xael, lib. 4. num. 90. ibid.
                  Gets the Fortress, and return to Goa, lib. 4.
num. 92. pag. 252.
                  The praise of Dom Alvaro de Castro, lib. 4.
num. 110. pag. 272.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Antonio de Attayde.
                  Goes from Bacaim, lib. 3. num. 139. pag.
138.
                  Arrives at Goa, lib. 2. num. 143. pag. 141.
               
            
            
               
                  Antonio do Casal.
                  In the Battail of Dio encourageth the Souldiers
by holding up a Crucifix, lib. 3. num. 22.
pag. 185.
               
            
            
               
                  Antonio Correa.
                  Sallies out of the Fortress of Dio, to take some
of the Enemies, lib. 2. num. 150. pag.
145.
                  Sets upon 12. Moors, who take him Prisoner
ibid.
                  Is carried before Rumecaon, lib. 2. num.
151. pag. 146.
                  Who perswades him to change his Religion
ibid.
                  The affronts they put upon him, lib. 2.
num. 152. pag. 146.
                  He is beheaded for his Religion, ib. p. 147.
                  The Moors in scorn and derision shew our men
his Head ibid.
                  Our Souldiers set up the Head of a Moor to
confront Antonio Correa's, lib. 2.
num. 153. pag. 147.
               
            
            
               
                  Antonio Moniz Barretto.
                  Is content to go with a Carvel of Provisions to
Dio, lib. 2. num. 92. pag. 110.
                  Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2. num. 123. pag.
127.
                  His Courage in saving the Carvel, pag. 128.
                  Goes for Dio ibid.
                  The difficulties of the Voyage, lib. 2.
num. 124. pag. 129.
                  Arrives at the Fortress ibid.
                  The brave Iealousie betwixt him and Garcia
Rodriguez de Tavora ibid.
                  His Valour on several occasions, lib. 2. n. 130.
134. 167. 169. p. 133. 135. 155. 158.
                  Is incited by a Souldier, whom he got releas'd
from the Service, and brought with him for
Portugall, lib. 2. num. 148. pag. 144.
                  
                     
Goes to look out for the Ships of Cambaya, and
takes some of them, lib. 3. num. 35.
pag. 197.
                  Goes to Candea to further the Conversion of
that King, lib. 4. num. 4. pag. 205.
                  His Voyage, lib. 4. num. 10. pag. 209.
                  Arrives at Candea, and finds things chang'd
ibid.
                  Endeavours to return, lib. 4. num. 17.
pag. 210.
                  Is fall'n upon by the Enemies, lib. 4.
num. 13. ibid.
                  The difficulties of his March, lib. 4.
num. 13. pag. 211.
                  His prudence in moderating the Souldiers,
lib. 4. num. 14. ibid.
                  His bravery in Fighting, lib. 4. num. 15.
pag. 212.
                  He retreats ibid.
                  Upon a Letter from the King of Candea would
return, lib. 4. num. 17. pag. 213.
                  The Souldiers are against it ibid.
                  He gets to his Fleet ibid.
                  Returns to Dio with the Governour, lib. 4.
num. 43. pag. 228.
                  Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro, to be Commander
of the Fortress to be Built there,
lib. 4. num. 82. pag. 247.
                  His Courage at Xael, lib. 4. num. 91.
pag. 252.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Antonio de Noronha.
                  Son to the Vice-Roy Dom Garcia, Ships himself
for Dio, with 60. Souldiers at his own
charge, lib. 3. num. 4. pag. 169.
                  Takes some of the Mecca Fleet, lib. 4.
num. 71. pag. 241.
                  Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro, lib. 4.
num. 82. pag. 247.
                  His Valour at Xael, lib. 4. num. 91. pag.
252.
               
            
            
               
                  Antonio Pecanha.
                  Commander of Saint Georges work in Dio,
lib. 2. num. 32. pag. 78.
                  His Courage in Fighting, lib. 2. num. 73.
pag. 100.
                  Is one of the five Souldiers who stoutly resist the
Enemy, lib. 2. num. 119. pag. 124.
               
            
            
               
                  Antote.
                  A City destroy'd by Dom Manoel de Lima,
lib. 3. num. 7. pag. 174.
               
            
            
               
                  Athanasio Freire.
                  Going for Dio run on Shore hard by Surat, and
was carried before Sultan Mahamud, lib. 2.
num. 156. pag. 148.
               
            
            
               
                  Azedecaon.
                  One of Hidalcaon's Commanders, lib. 1.
num. 53. pag. 32.
                  Routed by the Governour Dom John de Castro,
lib. 1. num. 55. pag. 33.
               
            
         
         
            B.
            
               
                  Balsora.
                  IN Arabia the Happy, its description,
lib. 3. num. 36. pag. 197.
                  The Turks fortifie themselves in it, pag. 198.
               
            
            
               
                  Barba-Rosla.
                  A famous Pirat, lib. 1. num. 9. pag. 3.
                  Perswades the Turk to make Warr upon Christendome,
lib. 1. num. 23. pag. 11.
                  Comes with a Fleet towards the Streights,
lib. 1. num. 28. pag. 15.
                  Seeing Dom John de Castro's resolution alters
his course, lib. 1. num. 29. pag. 16.
               
            
            
               
                  Baroche.
                  Its situation and strength, lib. 4. num. 5.
pag. 206.
                  The Trade of the Inhabitants ibid.
                  Madre Maluco Lord of it ibid.
                  Dom Iorge de Menezes enters it, and sets it
on fire, lib. 4. num. 6. ibid.
                  Madre Maluco comes too late to its help, lib. 4.
num. 7. pag. 207.
                  Dom Alvaro coming in sight of it, the Fortress
is quitted, lib. 4. num. 55. pag. 234.
               
            
            
               
                  Bastion.
                  The great Ruins of Saint James's Bastion,
lib. 2. num. 54. pag. 89.
                  Coge-Sofar raiseth a great Work before Saint
Thomas's, which doth much Dammage it,
lib. 2. num. 56. pag. 90.
                  Juzarcaon falls upon Saint Johns, lib. 2.
num. 67. pag. 90.
                  And Rumecaon upon Saint Thomas's, lib. 2.
num. 68. pag. 96.
                  
                     
The Turks enter the Work, lib. 2. num. 75.
pag. 101.
                  'Tis reported to be taken, lib. 2. num. 76.
pag. 101.
                  The Enemy makes a Bastion over against Saint
James's, lib. 2. num. 93. pag. 111.
                  Our men throw it down, lib. 2. num. 94.
pag. 111.
                  The Turks get upon Saint Thomas's, lib. 2.
num. 102. pag. 116.
                  The Enemy falls upon Saint James's, lib. 2.
num. 128. pag. 132.
                  And upon Saint John's, and retires, lib. 2.
num. 135. pag. 136.
                  The Enemy plants three Colours on St. James's,
lib. 2. num. 137. pag. 137.
                  Here they fought Couragiously, lib. 2.
num. 141. pag. 140.
                  Saint Thomas's work fallen upon, lib. 2.
num. 147. pag. 143.
                  The success in Saint James's, lib. 2.
num. 138. pag. 138.
               
            
            
               
                  Beard.
                  The Governour pawns some hairs of his Beard
to the City of Goa, for the Building up again
the Fortress of Dio, lib. 3. num. 29.
pag. 189.
                  The Citizens of Goa return them, lib. 3.
num. 30. pag. 192.
                  Where, and how they are preserv'd to this day
ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Bento Barbosa.
                  One of the five Souldiers who stoutly resisted
the Enemies in Dio, lib. 2. num. 119.
pag. 124.
               
            
            
               
                  Bernardim de Sousa.
                  Commander of the Molucos, lib. 2.
num. 28. pag. 215.
                  He carries with him Cachil Aeyro ibid.
They arrive at Ternate, lib. 4. num. 12.
ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Bertholomew Correa.
                  One of the five Souldiers who Couragiously
kept off the Enemy in Dio, lib. 2
num. 119. pag.. 124.
               
            
         
         
            C.
            
               
                  Cachil Aeyro.
                  THe Governour invests him in the Crown
of Maluco, lib. 2. num. 12. pag. 65.
                  Goes a Prisoner to Goa, by order from Jordaon
de Freitas. lib. 4. num. 20. pag. 215.
                  The Governour absolves him ibid.
                  Returns to Ternate with Bernardim de Sousa,
lib. 4. num. 21. ibid.
                  Is restor'd ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Calabatecaon.
                  A stout Turk of Dalmatia, lib. 4.
num. 57. pag. 235.
                  One of Hidalcaon's Commanders ibid.
                  Retires from Agacaim, where the Governour
enters, lib. 4. num. 64. pag. 238.
                  Returns to put his men in order, lib. 4.
num. 66. ibid.
                  Is kill'd by Diogo de Almeyda, pag. 239.
               
            
            
               
                  Cambre.
                  Dom Alvaro resolves to enter Cambre, lib. 1.
num. 61. pag. 39.
                  Resolves to invest it ibid.
                  Goes on Shore, pag. 40.
                  The greatness and strength of the place, lib. 1.
num. 62. pag. 40.
                  Resistance of the Enemy, lib. 1. num. 63.
pag. 41.
                  The City is at last wonn, lib. 1. num. 64.
ibid.
                  Its destruction, and pillage, pag. 42.
               
            
            
               
                  Campar.
                  The King of Campar accepts the Subjection,
offered him by the Inhabitants of Adem,
lib. 4. num. 75. pag. 244.
                  Sends men against the Tyrant Marzaon ibid.
                  Enters the City by agreement, lib. 4.
num. 76. ibid.
                  Goes out afterwards against the Tyrant, and
Dyes in the Battail, lib. 4. n. 77. p. 245.
               
            
            
               
                  Candea.
                  A Kingdome in the Island of a Zeilan, lib. 4.
num. 2. pag. 205.
                  The King receives the Preaching of the Gospel
ibid.
                  
                     
Is inconstant, but the Friars encourage him,
lib. 4. num. 3. ibid.
                  The King of Cotta disswades him from changing
his Religion, lib. 4. n. 8. p. 208.
                  The King of Candea consents, lib. 4.
num. 9. pag. 209.
                  Afterwards repents of what he hath done,
lib. 4. num. 16. pag. 212.
               
            
            
               
                  Charls the fifth, Emperour.
                  Resolves to find out Barba-Rossa, lib. 1.
num. 9. pag. 4.
                  A pass of Civility betwixt him and the Infante
Dom Lewis, lib. 1. n. 12. p. 6.
                  Would have Knighted Dom John de Castro,
but he excus'd it, lib. 1. num. 13.
pag. 7.
                  His reward to the Commanders of the Fleet,
which Dom John refuseth, lib. 1. ibid.
                  Adviseth the King Dom John of the designs
of the Turk, lib. 1. n. 24. p. 13.
                  Asketh supplies of him to resist him, lib. 1.
num. 25. pag. 13.
               
            
            
               
                  Catherina de Sousa.
                  Writes to the Governour, and offers him her
Iewels for the carrying on the Warr, lib. 2.
num. 91. pag. 109.
               
            
            
               
                  Caxem.
                  The King of Caxem sends for help to the Governour,
lib. 4. num. 83. pag. 247.
                  The Governour sends Dom John de Attayde
with four Ships. ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Cealaon.
                  The King Dom John the third sends some
Franciscan Friers to preach the Gospel in
Zeilan, lib. 4. num. 1. pag. 204.
               
            
            
               
                  Coge-Sofar.
                  Perswades Mahomet King of Cambaya to take
Dio from the Portuguese, lib. 2. num. 3.
pag. 54.
                  Who this Moor was, lib. 2. n. 4. ibid.
                  How he came to Cambaya, lib. 2. num. 6.
pag. 56.
                  His arguments for the design of Dio, lib. 2.
num. 7. pag. 57.
                  His proposition to the Commander of the Fortress,
lib. 2. num. 21. pag. 70.
                  He strives to gain it by treachery, lib. 2.
num. 24.
                  He comes to Dio with an Army, lib. 2.
num. 25. pag. 73.
                  His Ammunition and Provision, lib. 2.
num. 27. pag. 74.
                  His Speech to his men, lib. 2. n. 28. ibid.
                  He makes propositions again to the Commander
of the Fortress, lib. 2. num. 29. pag. 75.
                  Recruits come to him, lib. 2. n. 34. p. 79.
                  He begins to Batter the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 35. pag. 80.
                  The stratagem he laid in a Ship, lib. 2.
num. 36. ibid.
                  Which the Portuguese defeat, lib. 2.
num. 37. pag. 81.
                  He continues his Battery, lib. 2. num. 38,
39. 48. 51. pag. 82. 86. 88.
                  He makes an Oath to take Dio, or perish in the
design, lib. 2. num. 53. pag. 89.
                  He Dies with a Musket shot, lib. 2.
num. 60. pag. 92.
               
            
            
               
                  Compassion.
                  The Compassion of the Governour Dom John
de Castro, lib. 1. num. 37. pag. 20.
num. 38. pag. 21. lib. 4. num. 54.
pag. 234. num. 100. pag. 262.
               
            
            
               
                  Cotta.
                  A Kingdome in the Island of Zeilan, lib. 4.
num. 1. pag. 204.
                  The King receives the Franciscans ibid.
                  It disswaded from changing his Religion,
lib. 4. num. 8. pag. 208.
               
            
            
               
                  Cross.
                  The Governour Dom John de Castro's Veneration
to the Holy Cross, lib. 1.
num. 56. pag. 33.
                  The finding the Cross of St. Thomas, lib. 1.
num. 57. pag. 34.
                  The miracle of that Cross ibid.
                  How the Governour was affected at the News,
lib. 1. num. 58. pag. 37.
               
            
         
         
            D.
            
               
                  Dabul.
                  A City of Hidalcaon's, lib. 4. num. 60.
pag. 236.
                  Enter'd and Destroy'd by the Governour and

his Son Dom Alvaro, lib. 4. num. 61.
pag. 236.
               
            
            
               
                  Dabul the upper.
                  Another City of the same name Destroyed by the
Governour and his Son, lib. 4. num. 70.
pag. 240.
               
            
            
               
                  Dio.
                  The description of the Island, lib. 2.
num. 26. pag. 73.
                  Coge-Sofar begins to Batter the Fortress,
lib. 2. num. 35. pag. 80.
                  The Enemies command the Ditch, lib. 2.
num. 48. pag. 86.
                  A postern found in the Fortress, by which the
Commander repairs some Breaches, lib. 2.
num. 59. p. 92.
                  After that he Shuts it up, lib. 2. num. 61.
pag. 93.
                  The scarcity in the Fortress, lib. 2. num. 62.
ibid.
                  The courage and resistance of the Portuguese,
lib. 2. num. 69. pag. 97.
                  Another Assault, lib. 2. n. 73. p. 100.
                  The Turks get upon the Church, where Dom
John Mascarenhas goes to help, lib. 2.
num. 81. pag. 104.
                  They fight there with great Courage ibid.
                  The Enemies retire, lib. 2. n. 82. p. 104.
                  Many of them Dye, lib. 2. n. 84. p. 106.
                  The Valour of fourteen Portuguese Souldiers,
lib. 2. num. 95. pag. 112.
                  A general Assault, lib. 2. n. 96. p. 113.
                  How the Portuguese prevent the fire, lib. 2.
num. 97. ibid.
                  The Enemy retires, lib. 2. n. 99. p. 114.
                  With what loss ibid.
                  Another assault, lib. 2. n. 102. p. 116.
                  The Portuguese's resistance, lib. 2. num. 103.
ibid.
                  The great loss of the Enemies, lib. 2.
num. 105. pag. 117.
                  The wants of the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 106. pag. 148.
                  What provision they make in the want of Pots
of Powder, lib. 2. num. 108. ibid.
                  The Enemy makes as if he would give another
Assault, lib. 2. num. 114. pag. 121.
                  Notable courage of five Souldiers, lib. 2.
num. 116. pag. 123.
                  Their names, lib. 2. num. 119. pag. 124.
                  The Portuguese repair the Mines, lib. 2.
num. 126. pag. 130.
                  The Enemy gives another Assault, lib. 2.
num. 134. pag. 135.
                  The Portuguese's stout resistance, ibid.
                  The danger in which they are, lib. 2.
n. 137. p. 137. n. 142. p. 141.
                  The defend the Breachers of the Mine, lib. 2.
num. 145. pag. 142.
                  The extremity the Fortress is in, lib. 2.
num. 155. pag. 148.
                  The resolution of the Portuguese to Sally out
and find the Enemy, lib. 2. num. 161.
pag. 151.
                  They go on in their Resolution against the opinion
of the Commanders, lib. 2. num. 163.
pag. 152.
                  Their last Sally, and their Order, lib. 2.
num. 164. pag. 153.
                  The Enemies resistance, lib. 2. num. 165.
ibid.
                  The Portuguese's loss in this Disorder, lib. 2.
num. 170. pag. 155.
                  After this the Portuguese take fourteen Vessels
carrying Provisions to the Enemy, lib. 2.
num. 179. pag. 167.
                  The unfortunate Gallantry of three Portuguese
Souldiers, lib. 3. num. 15. pag. 181.
                  The Victory, lib. 3. num. 25. pag. 187.
                  The number of the Enemies loss, lib. 3.
num. 27. pag. 188.
                  The Booty and Plunder of the Castle, lib. 3.
num. 28. ibid.
                  A Canon brought from Dio and put into Saint
Gilians ibid.
                  The number of the Ded, pag. 189.
                  The Governour re-builds the Fortress, lib. 3.
n. 29. ibid. n. 31. p. 194.
                  Dom John Mascarenhas leaves the place, and
the Governour entrusts it with Lewis Falcaon,
lib. 4. num. 53. pag. 233.
               
            
            
               
                  Don Diogo de Almeyda Freire.
                  Commander in Chief in Goa, lib. 2.
num. 180. pag. 162.
                  Is against the Governours resolution of going to
Dio, ibid.
                  He remains in the Government in his absence,
lib. 3. num. 1. pag. 167.
                  Visits him at Sea when he returns, lib. 3.
num. 39. pag. 199.
                  Is sent by the Governour against 
lib. 4. n. 19. p. 214. n. 32. p. 222.
                  Comes to the Fortress f Rachal ibid.
                  Where he retires his men ibid.
                  Goes out against Hidalcaon, lib. 4.
                  num. 38. pag. 226.
                  
                     
Destres to do so upon an other occasion, lib. 4.
num. 58. pag. 235.
                  The City hinders him, ibid.
                  He adviseth the Governour, lib. 4.
num. 59. pag. 236.
                  Who stays for him at Agacaim, lib. 4.
num. 62. pag. 237.
                  He kills the Enemies General, lib. 4.
num. 36. pag. 239.
                  He continueth in the Country Salsete with some
Horse, lib. 4. num. 69. pag. 240.
                  The Vice-Roy resigns the Government of the
State to him and the Bishop, lib. 4.
num. 101. pag. 263.
               
            
            
               
                  Diogo de Anaya.
                  A famous Action of his, in getting intelligence
from the Enemy, lib. 2. n. 52. p. 81.
               
            
            
               
                  Diogo de Reynoso.
                  The Governour recommends his Son Dom
Fernando to him, lib. 2. num. 30.
pag. 77.
                  He helps in Saint Thomas's work, lib. 2.
num. 100. pag. 119.
                  His too great Courage is the occasion of the loss
of a great many men in the Ruine, lib. 2.
num. 115. pag. 122.
               
            
            
               
                  Diogo Soarez de Mello.
                  Being in Patane, is sent for by Simaon de Mello
to come to Melaca, lib. 4. n. 43. p. 216.
                  Whether he goes, lib. 4. num. 24. pag. 351.
                  He goes out with Don Francisco d' Eca against
the King of Achem, lib. 4. num. 25.
pag. 217.
                  He pacifith the mutiny of the Souldiers,
lib. 4. num. 26. pag. 218.
                  He makes the Enemies Admiral Galley yield,
lib. 4. num. 27. pag. 219.
               
            
            
               
                  St. Dominicks de Bemfica.
                  A  near Lisbone, lib. 4. num. 105.
pag. 265.
                  The Bishop  General Builds a rich
Chapel there, lib. 4. num. 106. pag. 266.
                  
                     
                  
                  And Dom Alvaro de Castro's lib. 4.
num. 108. pag. 268.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Duarte de Menezes.
                  Governour of Tangier, lib. 1. n. 3. p. 2.
                  Knights Dom John de Castro, lib. 1.
num. 5. ibid.
                  Informs the King of his deserts, ibid.
                  Goes from Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 139. p. 138.
                  Arrives at Dio. lib. 2. n. 140. p. 139.
                  His Valour in the Fight, lib. 2. num. 169.
pag. 155.
                  A Duel between Dom John Manoel, and
John Falcaon, and how stoutly they behaved
themselves against the Enemy, lib. 3.
num. 16. pag. 182.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Estavaon da Gama.
                  Succeeds Dom Garcia de Noronha in the Goment
of India, lib. 1. num. 18. pag. 8.
                  Goes to the Red-Sea, lib. 1. n. 19. p. 9.
                  Knights Dom Alvaro de Castro, lib. 1.
num. 20. pag. 10.
               
            
         
         
            F.
            
               
                  Fausto Serraon de Calvos.
                  THe witty answer he gives to the Governour,
lib. 4. num. 48. pag. 231.
               
            
            
               
                  Fernaon Carvallo.
                  Sends to get Intelligence by order from the
Commander of Dio, lib. 2. n. 50. p. 87.
                  Adviseth the Governour what he saw amongst
the Enemies, lib. 2. num. 7. pag. 99.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Fernando de Castro.
                  Goes to India with the Governour his Father,
lib. 1. num. 35. pag. 19.
                  Goes with Relief to Dio, lib. 2. num. 30.
pag. 76.
                  Arrives at the Fortress, lib. . num. 40.
pag. 83.
                  His Reception by the Commander, lib. 2.
num. 41. ibid.
                  He askes him leave to Sally out against the
 Enemy, which he denies him, lib. 2.
num. 46. pag. 86.
                  His Cage, lib. 2. num. 98. pag. 14.
                  
                      sick he goes to help in Saint Thomas's
work, lib. 2. num. 11. pag. 1.
                  He dies in the Blowing up of a mine with
other Gentlemen, lib. 2. n. 125. p. 122.
                  
                     
Where his Body is laid, lib. 2. num. 120.
pag. 125.
                  The Governour commands his Bones to be taken
up, to pawn them to the City of Goa, but in
vain, lib. 3. num. 29. pag. 189.
               
            
            
               
                  Fernaon Perez.
                  Is the first who scales Xael against the Fartaques,
lib. 4. num. 90. pag. 252.
               
            
            
               
                  Fernaon de Sousa.
                  Is sent by the Governour to Maluco, lib. 2.
num. 14. pag. 66.
                  Answers the Letters of de Ruy Lopez de Villalobos
Commander of the Castillians,
lib. 2. n. 15. p. 67. n. 17. p. 68,
                  Goes in Person to parley with him, lib. 2. ib.
                  Their agreement. ibid.
                  His behaviour, upon the Castillian's breaking his
word, lib. 2. num. 20. pag. 69.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Francisdo d' Eca.
                  Goes from Malaca against the King of Achem.
Commanded by Simaon de Mello, lib. 4.
num. 25. pag. 217.
                  Hears where he is, and hath a mind to follow
him, lib. 4. num. 26. pag. 218.
                  The Souldiers mutiny ibid.
                  He comes in sight of the Enemy, lib. 4.
num. 27. pag. 218.
               
            
            
               
                  Francisco Guilherme.
                  Goes from Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 139. p. 138.
                  Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. n. 143. p. 141.
               
            
            
               
                  Francisco de Mello.
                  Governour of the Fortress of Rachol, lib. 4.
num. 38. pag. 226.
                  He sends to the Governour to joyn with him against
Hidalcaon ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Francisco de Menezes.
                  Goes with Relief to Dio, lib. 2. num. 87.
pag. 108.
                  Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 122. p. 127.
                  Afterwards at Agacaim, lib. 2. num. 158.
pag. 149.
                  His Courage in Dio, lib. 2. n. 160. p. 151.
                  He is against the Portuguese resolution of
Sallying, lib. 2. num. 162. pag. 152.
                  Goes along with them in the Sally, lib. 2.
num. 164. pag. 153.
                  He Died by a Bullet, lib. 2. n. 168. p. 154.
               
            
            
               
                  Francisco Vieira.
                  And Manoel Pereira another Souldier of fortune
stay in Adem, upon the departure of Dom
Payo, and Fight stoutly, lib. 4. n. 86. p. 249.
                  They save a Prince in the Defeat, whom they
carried to Campar, lib. 4. n. 87. p. 250.
               
            
            
               
                  Saint Francisco Xavier.
                  A faithfull Labourer in the Vineyard of our
Saviour, lib. 1. num. 71. pag. 50.
                  He quiets the people of Malaca, lib. 4.
num. 30. pag. 220.
                  He fore-tells the Victory, and the manner of
it, pag. 229.
                  He is Assistant to the Vice-Roy Dom John in
his Sickness, and till his Death, lib. 4.
num. 103. pag. 264.
               
            
         
         
            G.
            
               
                  Gandar.
                  A City on the Coast of Cambaya, destroy'd
by Manoel de Lima, lib. 3.
num. 33. pag. 318.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Garcia de Norunha.
                  Going to govern India carries with him Dom
John de Castro, lib. 1. n. 16. p. 8.
                  He Dies in a little time, and is succeeded by
Dom Estavaon da Gama, lib 1. ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora.
                  Goes to Dio with Antonio Moniz Barretto,
lib. 2. num. 123. pag. 128.
                  The brave Iealousie betwixt them, lib. 2.
num. 124. pag. 210.
                  His Courage in the Fight, lib. 2. num. 130.
pag. 133.
               
            
            
               
                  Guil. Goutinho.
                  Commander of Saint Johns work, lib. 2.
num. 32. pag. 78.
                  The care and courage of his Fighting, lib. 2.
num. 53. pag. 89.
                  He is blown up in a Mine, lib. 2.
num. 115. pag. 122.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Goga.
                  A City on the Coast of Cambaya, whither Dom
Manoel da Lima goes, lib. 3. n. 32. p. 195.
Plunder'd and Burnt ibid.
               
            
         
         
            H.
            
               
                  Hidaldaon.
                  HIs first Embassy to the Governour Dom
John, lib. 1. num. 43. pag. 24.
                  Who this Moor was ibid.
                  How he seiseth on the Crown, lib. 1.
num. 46. pag. 26.
                  His trouble upon Meale's coming to Goa,
lib. 1. num. 48. pag. 28.
                  Offers great Conditions to the Governour Martim
Alfonso de Sousa for the Person of
Meale, lib. 1. num. 49. pag. 29.
                  His first coming against the State of India,
lib. 1. num. 53. pag. 31.
                  He treats upon a Peace, seeing the fortune of
the Portuguese arms, lib. 1. n. 66. p. 43.
                  The Governour accepts it, lib. 1. num. 67.
ibid.
                  He sends Souldiers upon the main Land, lib. 4.
num. 18. pag. 214. n. 31. p. 222.
                  His perplexity ibid.
                  He retires to Ponda, lib. 4. n. 39. p. 226.
                  The Governour follows him, lib. 4.
num. 40. pag. 217.
                  Makes him retire to the Mountain ibid.
                  He renews the Warr, lib. 4. n. 57. p. 235.
                  His losses, lib. 4. num. 61, 62, 63, 64,
65, 66, 67, 68, 69, & 70.
               
            
         
         
            I.
            
               
                  Jacome Leite.
                  DEfeats a Stratagem of Coge-Sofars,
lib. 2. num. 37. pag. 81.
                  Takes store of Provision from the Enemy, with
the Slaughter of many of his men, lib. 2.
num. 45. pag. 81.
               
            
            
               
                  The King Dom John.
                  Sends for Dom John de Castro from Tangie;
and Rewards him, lib. 1. num. 6. pag. 3.
                  What he gives him at his first going to India,
lib. 1. num. 16. pag. 8.
                  Makes him Admiral of the Navy of the
Coast, lib. 1. num. 21. pag. 10.
                  Afterwards of the Fleet against the Turk,
lib. 1. num. 26. pag. 14.
                  His confidence in him, lib. 1. num. 27.
pag. 14.
                  He elects him for Governour of India, lib. 1.
num. 33. pag. 18.
                  The Letter he writes him, lib. 1.
num. 69. pag. 44.
                  His rejoycing for the news of the Victory of
Dio, lib. 4. num. 94. pag. 253.
                  Another Letter he writes him, and the Rewards
bestowed upon him, lib. 4.
num. 95. pag. 254.
                  He prolongs his Government three years more,
with the itle of Vice-Roy, lib. 4.
num. 98. pag. 261.
                  He sends six Ships to India, lib. 4.
num. 99. pag. 262.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom John de Albequerque Bishop.
                  He remains in the Government with Dom
Diogo de Almeyda, in the absence of the
Governour, lib. 3. num. 1. pag. 167.
                  At his return visits him on the Sea, lib. 3.
num. 39. pag. 199.
                  Receives him in the See with a Te Deum
Laudamus, lib. 3. num. 41. pag. 203.
                  The Vice-Roy at his Death resigns the Government
to him, and Dom Diogo d' Almeyda,
lib. 4. num. 101. pag. 263.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom John d' Almeyda.
                  And his Brother Dom Pedro intrusted with
Saint James's work at Dio, lib. 2.
num. 32. pag. 78.
                  They Sally out against the Enemy, and their
Execution, lib. 2. num. 94. pag. 111.
                  His Courage in the Fight, lib. 2.
num. 53. 68. 75.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom John d' Attayde.
                  Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro de Castro,
lib. 4. num. 82. pag. 247.
                  The Governour sends him to Caxem, lib. 4.
num. 8. pag. 248.
                  The success of his Voyage, lib. 4.
num. 88. pag. 250.
                  He is met with by Dom Alvaro, lib. 4.
num. 89. ibid.
                  His Courage at Xael, lib. 4. num. 91.
pag. 252.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Dom John de Castro.
                  His first Studies, lib. 1. num. 1. pag. 1.
                  Applies himself to the Mathematicks, lib. 1.
num. 2. pag. 1.
                  He goes to Tangiers, lib. 1. num. 4. pag. 2.
                  His behaviour at Court, lib. 1. num. 7.
pag. 3.
                  He Marries Dona Leonor Coutinho, lib. 1.
num. 8. ibid.
                  He goes to Tunis, lib. 1. num. 9. ibid.
                  Returned from that Expedition, he retires to
Sintra, lib. 1. num. 14. pag. 7.
                  His first Voyage to the Indies, lib. 1.
num. 15. pag. 7.
                  In the company of Dom Garcia de Noronha,
lib. 1. num. 16. pag. 8.
                  He goes with Relief to Dio, lib. 1.
num. 17. pag. 8.
                  He goes to the Red-Sea with Dom Estevaon
da Gama, lib. 1. num. 19. pag. 9.
                  He makes a Iournal of the Voyage ibid.
                  He returns to Portugall, and the King makes
him Admiral of the Navy of the Coast,
lib. 1. num. 21. pag. 10.
                  He defeats seven Ships of the Pirats ibid.
                  Brings in the Fleet from India. ibid.
                  The King makes him Admiral of the Navy
against the Turk, lib. 1. num. 26. pag. 14.
                  He discourseth with Dom Alvaro Bacaon, the
Emperours Admiral, about the Action,
lib. 1. num. 28. pag. 15.
                  They resolve to Fight ibid.
                  He continues in that opinion against the Spanish
General ibid.
                  Expects the Enemy three days in the Streights
mouth, lib. 1. num. 29. pag. 16.
                  Goes to Ceita, lib. 1. num. 3. pag. 16.
                  Returns to Lisbone, and retires to Sintra,
ibid.
                  The King makes him Governour of India,
lib. 1. num. 33. pag. 18.
                  He takes care for providing the Fleet, lib. 1.
num. 34. pag. 19.
                  He reproves the fine Cloaths of his Son, lib. 1.
num. 35. ibid.
                  He departs for India, lib. 1. num. 37.
pag. 20.
                  He arrives at Mozambick, lib. 1.
num. 38. pag. 21.
                  He departs thence for Goa, lib. 1.
num. 39. pag. 22.
                  His reception there, lib. 1. num. 40. ibid.
                  The condition he finds India in, lib. 1.
num. 41. pag. 23.
                  His answer to Hidalcaon about the business of
Meale, lib. 1. num. 51. pag. 30.
                  His preparaetions for the Warr, lib. 1.
num. 52. pag. 31.
                  He goes against Azedecaon one of Hidalcaon's
Commanders, lib. 1. num. 55. pag. 33.
                  He fights him, and routs him ibid.
                  He takes care about the affairs of the State,
lib. 1. num. 68. pag. 44.
                  And about matters of Religion ibid.
                  He sends men to Dio, lib. 2. num. 10.
pag. 64.
                  He writes to Sultan Mahomet concerning that
Fortress ibid.
                  He sends Recruits to Dio, lib. 2.
num. 23. pag. 72.
                  Afterwards his Son Dom Ferdinando with
fresh Recruits, lib. 2. num. 30. pag. 76.
                  Writes a civil Letter to Dom John Mascarenhas,
lib. 2. num. 31. pag. 72.
                  Proclaims Warr against Cambaya, lib. 2.
num. 43. pag. 84.
                  Writes to all the places, and borrows Money to
relieve Dio, lib. 2. num. 44. pag. 85.
                  Makes publick Prayers ibid.
                  His sollicitousness about the Rcruits, lib. 2.
num. 86. pag. 107.
                  He sends his Son Dom Alvaro, lib. 3.
num. 87. ibid.
                  And Dom Francisco de Menezes, lib. 2.
ibid.
                  The preparation he makes, lib. 2. num. 89.
pag. 108. num. 92. pag. 110.
                  Hears news from Dio, lib. 2. num. 175.
pag. 158.
                  The piety and chearfulness with which he receives
it ibid.
                  His constancy on the news of the Death of his
Son Dom Ferdinando ibid.
                  He makes a Procession for Thanksgiving,
lib. 2. num. 176. pag. 159.
                  He declares in Council his resolution to go to
Dio, lib. 2. num. 180. pag. 162.
                  Which is spoke against, lib. 2. num. 181.
pag. 162.
                  Yet he resolves to go, lib. 2. num. 182.
pag. 165.
                  He departs from Goa to relieve Dio, lib. 3.
num. 1. pag. 167.
                  His Fleet, and the Commanders, lib. 3.
num. 2. pag. 168.
                  He arrives at Bacaim, and makes Warr upon
Cambaya, lib. 3. num. 3. pag. 168.
                  He goes into Dio, lib. 3. n. 9. p. 175.
                  He holds a Council at Sea, lib. 3. num. 10.
ibid.
                  
                     
Puts his men into Dio ibid.
                  Resolves to Fight, lib. 3. n. 12. p. 177.
                  The orders he gives to the Fleet ibid.
                  He speaks to the Souldiers, lib. 3.
num. 13. pag. 178.
                  The order he puts them in, lib. 3.
num. 14. ibid.
                  He Sallies out of the Fortress, lib. 3.
num. 15. pag. 181.
                  The danger he is in, and how he frees himself,
lib. 3. num. 18. pag. 183.
                  He cries out Victory, and persues it ibid.
                  He fights in Person, lib. 3. n. 19. p. 184.
                  He falls upon Rumecaon, lib. 3. num. 21.
pag. 185.
                  Gets the Victory, lib. 3. num. 25. pag. 187.
                  Is congratulated for the Victory, lib. 3.
num. 29. pag. 188.
                  He re-builds the Fortress, lib. 3. num. 29.
pag. 189.
                  He pawns the hairs of his Beard ibid.
                  The Citizens of Goa return them with the
Money he ask't, lib. 3. n. 30. p. 191.
                  He goes on with the work at the Fortress,
lib. 3. num, 31. pag. 194.
                  He sends Dom Manoel de Lima to make Warr
on the Coast of Cambaya, lib. 3.
num. 32. ibid.
                  After him Antonio Moniz to look for the Ships
of Cambaya, lib. 3. num. 35. pag. 197.
                  Hath news from Ormus about Commotions
there, lib. 3. num. 36. ibid.
                  He sends Dom Manoel da Lima thither,
lib. 3. num. 37. pag. 198.
                  He writes to the King Dom John about the
deserts of the Souldiers, ibid. pag. 199.
                  Imbarks for Goa, lib. 3. num. 39. ibid.
                  Arrives there, and is Visited at Sea, the Triumphorder'd
him, and the Description of it,
lib. 3. n. 39. p. 199. n. 40. p. 220.
                  His entrance into the City, lib. 3. num. 41.
pag. 201.
                  One of the Magistrates makes him a Speech
ibid.
                  He goes to the Bishops See, and acknowledgeth
God to be the Author of Victories, lib. 3.
pag. 203.
                  He endeavours the Conversion of the King of
Candea, and sends Antonio Moniz Barretto
thither, lib. 4. num. 4. pag. 205.
                  He sends Dom Diogo de Almeyda against
Hidalcaon, lib. 4. num. 19. pag. 214.
                  And after him other Forces, lib. 4. ibid.
                  Consults about the Warr against Hidalcaon,
lib. 4. num. 33. pag. 223.
                  Which is deferr'd till another time ibid.
                  He exerciseth his Souldiers, lib. 4.
num. 34. pag. 223.
                  And encourageth them ibid.
                  Receives advice from Dio, lib. 4.
num. 35. pag. 224.
                  Which he communicates to the Council, and desires
their help. num. 36. ibid.
                  Adviseth Chaul and Bacaim, lib. 4
num. 36. pag. 225.
                  Resolves upon a Warr against Hidalcaon,
lib. 4. num. 38. pag. 226.
                  The order of his men ibid.
                  Embassadors come to him from Canara, lib. 4
num. 39. pag. 226.
                  He gives them Audience, and dispatcheth
them ibid.
                  He persues Hidalcaon, lib. 4. num. 40.
pag. 227.
                  He goes to Goa, lib. 4. num. 42. pag. 228.
                  He returns to Dio and his Fleet, num. 43.
ibid.
                  He arrives at Barcaim, lib. 4. num. 44.
pag. 229.
                  He sends his Son Dom Alvaro to Surat ibid.
                  His gallantry to fright the Moors, lib. 4.
num. 48. pag. 231.
                  He joyns with Dom Alvaro at the Barr of
Sutat, lib. 4. num. 49. ibid.
                  He goes in sight of the Sultan, and presents him
Battail ibid.
                  His Speech to the Souldiers, lib. 4.
num. 50. pag. 232.
                  The answer of the Gentlemen and Officers,
num. 51. ibid.
                  He stays three hours in the Field, and returns
on Board, lib. 4. num. 51. pag. 233.
                  What mischief he does the Enemy, num. 52.
ibid.
                  He arrives at Dio, lib. 3. n. 53. p. 233.
                  Upon Dom John Mascarenhas's resigning the
place, he delivers it to Lewis Falcaon ib.
                  He imbarks for Bacaim, lib. 4. num. 54.
pag. 234.
                  Whence he writes to the King, putting him in
mind of those who had serv'd him, lib. 4.
num. 56. pag. 235.
                  The reward he beggs of him, lib. 4.
num. 94. pag. 253.
                  Takes Shipping for Goa, and goes in sight of
Dabul, lib. 4. num. 60. pag. 236.
                  Takes the City, lib. 4. num. 61. pag. 237.
                  Arrives at Agacaim, num. 62. ibid.
                  Falls upon the Enemies, num. 63. ibid.
                  Fights in Person, lib. 4. num. 67.
pag. 239.
                  Gets the Victory ibid.
                  
                     
Dispatcheth the Ships for the Kingdome,
lib. 4. num. 68. pag. 240.
                  Continueth the Warr against Hidalcaon,
num. 69. ibid.
                  He Destroys the upper Dabul, num. 70.
ibid.
                  Goes to Bacaim and spoils Cambaya, lib. 4.
num. 71. pag. 241.
                  The Inhabitants of Adem send to him for Relief
against the Tyrant, lib. 4.
num. 80. pag. 246.
                  The Governour sends his Son Dom Alvaro to
them, lib. 4. num. 82. pag. 246.
                  Embassadours from the King of Caxem come
to him, lib. 4. num. 83. pag. 247.
                  The Governours answer, and the Relief he
sends them ibid.
                  He receives Letters from the King Dom
John, from the Queen Dona Catherina, and
from the Infante Dom Lewis, lib. 4.
num. 95, 96, 97. pag. 254.
                  The King prolongs his Government by the Title
of Vice-Roy, lib. 4. num. 98. pag. 261.
                  There arrives a Ship at Goa from Portugall,
lib. 4. num. 100.
                  He receives Letters, and finds there his Honours
and Reward ibid.
                  He falls Sick, and resigns the Government,
lib. 4. num. 101.
                  He sends for the Governours, and speaks to
them, lib. 4. num. 102.
                  The Oath he takes before them ibid.
                  Knowing the danger of his Sickness, retires
himself with Saint Francisco Xaverius,
lib. 4. num. 103.
                  His Death, Burial, and the general grief,
ibid.
                  His Bones come to Portugall, and are Deposited
at Saint Dominicks in Lisbone, and
from thence are carried to Bemfica, lib. 4.
num. 104. pag. 265.
                  The Family of the Vice-Roy Dom John de
Castro, lib. 4. num. 110. pag. 269.
                  His Children, lib. 4. pag. 272.
               
            
            
               
                  John Coelho.
                  Chaplain in the Fortress of Dio, offers himself
to go to the Governour, lib. 2.
num. 63. pag. 94.
                  His news comes to him, lib. 3. num. 87.
pag. 107.
                  He returns to Dio, lib. 2. n. 101. p. 115.
                  He encourageth the Souldiers in the Fight,
lib. 2. num. 118. pag. 114.
               
            
            
               
                  John Falcaon.
                  The challenge between him and Dom John
Manoel, lib. 3. num. 16. pag. 181.
                  How 'tis made up ibid.
                  Upon the Wall he is cut to pieces ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Don John Manoel.
                  His challenge with John Falcaon, and how
'tis composed ibid.
                  Upon the Wall he hath his hands and head cut
off ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom John Mascarenhas.
                  Commander of Dio, lib. 2. n. 9. p. 64.
                  Adviseth the Governour Dom John de Castro
of the designs of Coge-Sofar ibid.
                  The proposition the Moor makes him, lib. 2.
num. 21. pag. 70.
                  His answer, and second advice to the Governour,
lib. 2. num. 22. pag. 71.
                  The provisions he makes against the Warr,
lib. 2. num. 25. pag. 72.
                  His answer to another proposition of Coge-Sofars,
lib. 2. num. 29. pag. 76.
                  He disposeth the Posts of the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 32. pag. 78.
                  Speaks to the Souldiers, lib. 2. num. 33.
ibid.
                  How he receiv'd Don Ferdinand de Castro
who came with Relief, lib. 2. num. 41.
pag. 83.
                  Sends news over-Land to the King Dom John,
lib. 2. num. 47. pag. 86.
                  His care and vigilancy, lib. 2. num. 58.
pag. 138. 154.
                  His design to defeat an other of the Enemy,
lib. 2. num. 65. pag. 94.
                  He repairs the Breaches of the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 71. pag. 98.
                  He helps to beat the Turks out, lib. 2.
num. 79. pag. 103.
                  Does it with great Courage, lib. 2. num. 80.
ibid.
                  His brave Resolution, lib. 2. num. 121.
pag. 126.
                  He adviseth Dom Alvaro de Castro of the
Streights of the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 125. pag. 130.
                  How he receives him at his Arrival, lib. 2.
num. 158. pag. 149.
                  He adviseth the Governour of the success of
the Fortress, lib. 2. num. 159. pag. 150.
                  
                     
He disswades the Portuguese, who desire to
Sally out upon the Enemy, lib. 2.
num. 162. pag. 151.
                  But seeing their Resolution, goes along with
them, lib. 2. num. 163. pag. 152.
                  The prudence of his Carriage, lib. 2.
num. 169. pag. 154.
                  He puts his Souldiers in order, lib. 2.
num. 170. pag. 155.
                  How he receives the Governour, lib. 3.
num. 9. pag. 175.
                  What men the Governour assigns him for the
Fight, lib. 3. num. 14. pag. 178.
                  His behaviour in it, lib. 3. num. 17.
pag. 182. n. 24. p. 186.
                  Enters the City, lib. 3. num. 23. ibid.
                  Resolves to leave his Government before his
time be expired, lib. 3. num. 34.
pag. 196.
                  He accepts of it again, and remains there,
lib. 3. num. 37. pag. 198.
                  Adviseth the Governour of the Resolutions of
the King of Cambaya, lib. 4.
num. 35. pag. 224.
                  He resigns the place, lib. 4. num. 53.
pag. 233.
                  He takes Shipping for Portugall, lib. 4.
num. 68. pag. 240.
                  His praises ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. John the Chirurgion.
                  One of the five Souldiers who stoutly resist the
Enemy at Dio, lib. 2. num. 199.
pag. 125.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Jeronimo de Menezes.
                  Commander in chief of Bacaim, lib. 2.
num. 178. pag. 160.
                  He assigns fifteen Ships to Vasco de Cunha to
carry them to Dio ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Jordaon de Freitas.
                  Commander of the Malucos, lib. 4.
num. 20. pag. 215.
                  He takes the King Aeyro, and sends him to the
Governour ibid.
                  He resigns the Government of the Malucoes to
Bernardim de Sousa, lib. 4. n. 21. ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom George de Menezes.
                  Goes out of Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 139. p. 138.
                  Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. num. 140. pag. 139.
                  The valour of his Fighting, lib. 2.
num. 169. pag. 154.
                  By the command of the Governour he stays in
the Bay of Cambay, lib. 3. num. 38.
pag. 199.
                  He takes from the Enemy some Barques of
Provisions, lib. 4. num. 5. pag. 206.
                  Fats upon the City Barohe, lib. 4. ibid.
                  Which he Destroys and Fires, lib. 4.
num. 6. pag. 207.
                  He takes the Sirname of Baroche ibid.
                  Goes for Dio with the Governour, lib. 4.
num. 43. pag. 228.
                  By order from Dom Alvaro he goes to Surat,
lib. 4. num. 45. pag. 229.
                  He goes on Shore, and with great Valour enters,
a illage, pag. 230.
                  He comes to the Souldiers help whilst they are
Fighting, lib. 4. ibid.
                  He desires five hundred Musquetteers of the
Governour to face the Sultan, lib. 4.
num. 51. pag. 233.
                  He takes some of the Mecca Fleet, lib. 4.
num. 71. pag. 241.
               
            
            
               
                  Isabell Fernandez.
                  A stout Matron, commonly call'd the old Woman
of Dio, lib. 2. num. 51. pag. 90.
                  Her courage upon divers occasions, lib. 2.
num. 117. pag. 123. num. 130.
pag. 133.
               
            
            
               
                  Isabell Madeira.
                  Her particular Courage in the Warr of Dio,
lib. 2. num. 119. pag. 124.
               
            
            
               
                  Juzarcaon.
                  A stout Abissine, whom Sultan Mahomet leaves
in his place at the Siege of Dio, lib. 2.
num. 51. pag. 88.
                  He vows to win the Fortress, or perish in the
design, lib. 2. num. 53. pag. 89.
                  He falls upon Saint John's Bastion, lib. 2.
num. 67. pag. 96.
                  He invests the Fause-bray, lib. 2.
num. 77. pag. 102.
                  He is kill'd with a Bullet, lib. 2.
num. 84. pag. 105.
               
            
            
               
                  Another Juzarcaon.
                  He goes to continue the Siege of Dio, lib. 2.
num. 93. pag. 111.
                  
                     
Falls upon Saint John's work, lib. 2.
num. 104. pag. 117.
                  Comes out of his Quarters to Fight with the
Portuguese, lib. 2. num. 165. pag. 153.
               
            
            
               
                  Letters.
                  The King Dom John's to the Governour Dom
John de Castro, lib. 1. num. 69. pag. 44.
                  Catherine de Sousa's to the Governour, lib. 2.
num. 91. pag. 109.
                  The Infante Dom Lewis's, lib. 3. n. 5. p. 170.
                  The Governour's to the Citizens of Goa, in
which he askes 20000. Pardaos upon the
hairs of his Beard, lib. 3. num. 29.
pag. 190.
                  The answer, lib. 3. num. 30. pag. 192.
                  The Governour's to his Son Dom Alvaro, about
Dom John Mascarenhas, lib. 3.
num. 37. pag. 199.
                  Another of the King's to the Governour,
lib. 4. num. 95. pag. 254.
                  The Queen Dona Catherine's to him, lib. 4.
num. 96. pag. 255.
                  The Infante Dom Lewis's to him, lib. 4.
num. 97. pag. 259.
               
            
         
         
            L.
            
               
                  Infante Dom Lewis.
                  LEarns the Mathematicks, lib. 1.
num. 2. pag. 1.
                  Goes to Tunis with the Emperour his Brother-in-law,
lib. 1. num. 10. pag. 5.
                  The Civility that pass'd between him and the
Emperour, lib. 1. num. 12. pag. 6.
                  He propounds Dom John de Castro for Governour
of India, lib. 1. num. 32. pag. 18.
               
            
            
               
                  Lewis de Almeyda.
                  Is sent by the Governour with six Carvills to
relieve Dio, lib. 2. num. 177. pag. 159.
                  He arrives at the Fortress, lib. 2.
num. 178. pag. 160.
                  He is commanded by Dom Alvaro de Castro,
to look for the Mecca Fleet, lib. 2.
num. 179. pag. 161.
                  He takes two of them, and goes with them to
Dio, ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Lewis Falcaon.
                  Comes from his Goverment of Ormus to Dio,
lib. 4. num. 53. pag. 233.
                  Dom John Mascarenhas leaving the place, the
Governour gives it him ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Lewis de Mello de Mendoca.
                  Goes from Bacaim to Dio, lib. 2.
num. 139. pag. 138.
                  The dangers of his Voyage ibid.
                  He resists those who would go back, lib. 2.
num. 140. pag. 139.
                  He arrives at Dio, and tells news of Dom
Alvaro ibid.
                  Is Lodg'd on Saint James's work, pag. 140.
                  Dyes by a Bullet, lib. 2. n. 167. p. 154.
               
            
            
               
                  Lewis de Sousa.
                  Commander of St. Thomas's work, lib. 2.
num. 32. pag. 78.
                  His care and Valour in Fighting, lib. 2.
num. 53. pag. 67. 74. 98. 102.
134. 170.
               
            
            
               
                  Lopa de Sousa.
                  Fights stoutly at Dio, and is Kill'd by a Dart,
lib. 2. num. 169. pag. 155.
               
            
            
               
                  Laurenzo Pirez de Tavora
                  
                  Commander of the Fleet which came from
Portugall, lib. 2. num. 174. pag. 157.
                  Comes to Cochim, and goes to Dio, lib. 3.
num. 4. pag. 169.
                  Is the first gets upon the Wall, lib. 3.
num. 18. pag. 183.
                  He returns for Lisbone, lib. 4. num. 93.
pag. 253.
               
            
         
         
            M.
            
               
                  Malaca.
                  THe conspiracy of diverse Kings against
it, lib. 4. num. 22. pag. 216.
                  The King of Achem comes thither, and immediately
retires, lib. 4. n. 24. p. 217.
                  Against whom Simon de Mello is sent forth
by the Governour, lib. 4. n. 25. ibid.
                  The Embassage from the Confederates, lib. 4.
num. 28. pag. 219.
                  Simon de Mello's answer, lib. 4.
num. 29. pag. 220.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Malucos.
                  The wonderfull accident hapned in them,
lib. 1. num. 71. pag. 51.
                  The King of Portuguese's right to them,
lib. 2. num. 11. pag. 65.
                  The Governour gives them to Cachil Aeyro,
lib. 2. num. 12. pag. 65.
                  The Castillians go thither,  2.
num. 13. pag. 66.
                  Their behaviour with the Portuguese, lib 2.
num. 19. pag. 68.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Manoel de Lima.
                  He arrives at Goa from Portugall, lib. 2.
num. 174. pag. 157.
                  Desires to go presently for Dio, and is disswaded
by the Governour, pag. 158.
                  With whom he goes, lib. 3. n. 2. p. 168
                  Is sent by the Governour with six Ships into
the Bay of Cambaya, where he takes several
Prizes, lib. 3. num. 3. pag. 169.
                  Does a great deal of mischief about Surat,
lib. 3. num. 6. pag. 173.
                  Destroys the City of Antoe, lib 3.
num. 7. pag. 174.
                  And other places on the Coast, lib. 3.
num. 8. pag. 175.
                  He arrives at Dio, and the Governour assigns
him five hundred Portuguese for the Fight,
lib. 3. num. 14. pag 178.
                  His Courage in the Fight, lib. 3.
num. 17. pag. 20. 4
                  He enters the City with Dom Alvaro, lib. 3.
num. 23. pag. 186.
                  He makes Warr on the places of the Coast,
lib. 3. num. 32. pag. 194.
                  Goes to the City of Coga, which he Sacks and
Burns, pag. 195.
                  Dstroys Gandar, lib. 3. num. 33. pag. 196.
                  Returns to Dio, lib. 3. num. 34. ibid.
                  Offers to stay on the place, on the Refignment of
Dom John Mascarenhas ibid.
                  Goes for Ormus, lib. 3. n. 37. p. 198.
                  The King of Campar askes Relief of him,
and offer's a Fortress in Adem, lib. 4.
num. 76. pag. 245.
               
            
            
               
                  Manoel Pereira, see Francisco Vierra.
Martim Alphonso de Sousa.
                  Governour of India, lib. 1. n. 31. p. 17.
                  Changeth the Bazarucos, lib. 4.
num. 42. pag. 23.
                  Sends for Meale to Go, lib. 1.
num. 47. pag. 27.
                  Resolves to deliver him up to Hidalcaon upon
their agreement, lib. 1. num. 50. pag. 30.
               
            
            
               
                  Martim Botelho.
                  With ten Companions goes to get Intelligence
amongst the Enemy, lib. 2. num. 109.
pag. 119.
                  The news he brings, lib. 2. num. 110.
ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Marzaon.
                  Succeeds Rax Soliman in the Segniory of Adem,
lib. 4. num. 74. pag. 243.
                  Fortifies himself in the Palace against the
King of Campar, lib. 4. num. 75.
pag. 244.
                  Delivering up upon Conditions, goes out of the
City, lib. 4. num. 76. ibid.
                  The hurt he does ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Meale.
                  Disquiets Hidalcaon, lib. 1. num. 44.
pag. 25.
                  Goes to Cambaya, num. 45. ibid.
                  Martim Alphonso de Sousa being the Governour
sends for him to Goa, lib. 1.
num. 47. pag. 27.
                  His Reception by the Governour ibid.
                  Who afterwards by agreement, intended to deliver
him up to Hidalcaon, lib. 1.
num. 50. pag. 30.
                  The Governour Dom John de Castro defends
him, lib. 1. num. 51. ibid.
                  Is the cause of Warr with Hidalcaon, lib. 4.
num. 18. pag. 213.
               
            
            
               
                  Miguel de Arnede.
                  A Gigantique Souldier who goes to Dio,
lib. 2. num. 123. pag. 128.
                  The manner of his Embarking ibid.
                  His courage and strength in the Fight, lib. 2.
num. 132. pag. 134.
               
            
            
               
                  Mines.
                  Saint Thomas's work is undermined, lib. 2.
num. 110. pag. 119.
                  The Mine is sprung, lib. 2. num. 115.
pag. 122.
                  The persons that perish in it. ibid.
                  
                     
Rumecaon makes others, lib. 2.
num. 126. pag. 130.
                  The Portuguese endeavour to prevent them,
pag. 131.
                  The Enemies fire them to their loss, lib. 2.
num. 137. pag. 137.
                  They open other, which the Portuguese prevent,
lib. 2. num. 171. pag. 156.
                  Afterwards fire another without any loss to the
Portuguese, lib. 2. num. 183. pag. 166.
               
            
            
               
                  Mozambique.
                  The Governour Dom John de Castro arrives
there, lib. 1. num. 38. pag. 21.
                  He changeth the Situation of the Fortress
ibid.
                  He receives Orders to enlarge it, lib. 4.
num. 37. pag. 225.
               
            
            
               
                  Money.
                  The complaints of the people upon the alteration,
lib. 1. num. 42. pag. 23.
                  The Governour hears the City and People concerning
it, ibid.
                  His Resolution about it, pag. 24.
               
            
            
               
                  Mojatecaon.
                  Praiseth the Valour of the Portuguese, lib. 2.
num. 132. pag. 134.
                  Goes out against the Portuguese, lib. 2.
num. 165. pag. 153.
                  Invests the Fortress, and retires, lib. 2.
num. 170. pag. 155.
               
            
         
         
            N.
            
               
                  Nuno Pereira.
                  HIs Courage and Fighting at Dio, lib. 2.
num. 170. pag. 155.
                  Goes to Goa, and in his Voyage dyes of his
Wounds, lib. 2. num. 175. pag. 159.
               
            
         
         
            P.
            
               
                  Dom Payo de Noronha.
                  GOes with twelve Ships to the Streight of
Rosalgate, lib. 4. num. 78.
pag. 245.
                  Offers to go to Adem to help the King of
Campar ibid.
                  Arrives at the City, num. 79. ibid.
                  Calls off the Souldiers, lib. 4.
num. 86. pag. 249.
                  Was not obey'd by Manoel Pereira, and Francisco
Viera, two Souldiers of fortune, who
Fight stoutly ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Pate and Patane.
                  Cities upon the Coast of Cambaya, burnt by the
Governour, lib. 4. num. 54. pag. 234.
               
            
            
               
                  Dom Pedro de Almeyda.
                  With his Brother Dom John de Almeyda
Sallies out upon the Enemy in Dio, and the
hurt he does, lib. 2. num. 94. pag. 111.
                  His Courage in Fighting, lib. 2. num. 75.
pag. 101. n. 134. p. 135.
               
            
            
               
                  Pedro Nunez.
                  A great Mathematician, and Master to
Dom John de Castro, lib. 1.
num. 2. pag. 1.
               
            
         
         
            R.
            
               
                  Rax Soliman.
                  ADdmiral of the design, at the first Siege of
Dio, lib. 4. num. 72. pag. 241.
                  Goes as a Friend into the Haven of Adem
ibid.
                  Beheads the King ibid.
                  Makes himself Master of the City, lib. 4.
num. 74. pag. 243.
               
            
            
               
                  Ruy Freire.
                  Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. num. 157.
pag. 148.
               
            
            
               
                  Ruy Lopez de Villa Lobos.
                  Commander of the Castillians, who went to the
Molucos, lib. 2. num. 13. pag. 66.
                  Endeavours to delay Fernaon de Sousa, lib. 2.
num. 14. 16. pag. 67.
                  Parlies with him, lib. 2. num. 18.
pag. 68.
                  Their agreement ibid.
                  Breaks his promise, and Fernaon de Sousa's
Behaviour upon it, lib. 2. num. 20.
pag. 69.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Rumecaon.
                  Succeeds his Father Coge-Sofar in the Warr,
lib. 2. num. 61.
pag. 93.
                  Goes on with a Machine his Father had begun,
ibid.
                  Offers the Portuguese conditions, lib. 2.
num. 66. pag. 95.
                  Falls upon Saint Thomas's work, lib. 2.
num. 68. pag. 96.
                  Commands the several Nations to Fight by
themselves, lib. 2. num. 69.
pag. 98.
                  Retires with loss, num. 70. ibid.
                  Falls to Superstitious praiers, lib. 2.
num. 72. pag. 99.
                  He resents the Death of Juzarcaon, lib. 2.
num. 84. pag. 105.
                  His answer to another Juzarcaon, whom the
Sultan sent to continue the Siege, lib. 2.
num. 93. pag. 111.
                  Goes about filling up the Ditch, lib. 2.
num. 110. pag. 115.
                  His stratagem to divert the Portuguese, lib. 2.
num. 111. pag. 120.
                  Retires with loss, lib. 2. num. 119.
pag. 124.
                  Goes on with the Mines, lib. 2. num. 126.
pag. 130.
                  Incourageth his Souldiers for another assault,
lib. 2. num. 127.
pag. 131.
                  Commands them to batter the Church, lib. 2.
num. 131. pag. 134.
                  Retires again with loss, lib. 2. num. 132.
ibid.
                  Hath advice by three Slaves which ran away
from the Portuguese, lib. 2. num. 133.
ibid.
                  Gives another assault, lib. 2. num. 134.
pag. 135.
                  Endeavours to beat down the Cistern, lib. 2.
num. 136. pag. 136.
                  He comes off from another assault with loss,
lib. 2. num. 142.
pag. 141.
                  Despairs of the design, lib. 2. num. 144.
pag. 142.
                  Opens another Mine, which is prevented,
ibid.
                  Retires again, lib. 2. num. 146.
pag. 143. num. 149.
pag. 144.
                  He falls on another time, and retires, lib. 2.
num. 160. pag. 151.
                  He is encouraged by his good success against the
Portuguese, lib. 2. num. 171.
pag. 156.
                  Continues Mining, ibid.
                  Builds a new City, num. 172. ibid.
                  Offers a great Ransome to Dom Alvaro for a
Janizary Commander, lib. 2. num. 179.
pag. 161
                  He makes another Mine, which Fir'd without
any loss to the Portuguese, lib. 2.
num. 183. pag. 166.
                  His discourse about the Governours coming,
lib. 3. num. 11.
pag. 176.
                  What Army he hath, and how he orders them,
ibid.
                  He resists the Portuguese at their Landing,
lib. 3. num. 15.
pag. 181.
                  He orders his men in the Field, lib. 3.
num. 20. pag. 184.
                  Dom Alvaro routs him, and he Rallies,
lib. 3. num. 21.
pag. 185.
                  He retires, lib. 3. num. 22. ibid.
                  Offers a new Battail, lib. 3. num. 24.
pag. 186.
                  Dyes, lib. 3. num. 25. pag. 187.
               
            
         
         
            S.
            
               
                  Sebastian de Sa.
                  GOes to Dio with Dom Fernando, lib. 2.
num. 30. pag. 76.
                  Is wounded by a poysoned Arrow, lib. 2.
num. 69. pag. 97.
                  He carries advice from the Commander in
chief to the Governour, lib. 2. num. 85.
pag. 106.
                  Is one of the five Souldiers who stoutly resists
the Enemy in Dio, lib. 2. num. 119.
pag. 124.
               
            
            
               
                  Ships.
                  Their number, and their Commanders which
went along with the Governour Dom John
de Castro, lib. 1. num. 36.
pag. 20.
                  The time of their departure, num. 37.
ibid.
                  
                     
The danger the Governours Ship was in,
ibid.
                  The Ship Holy Ghost, commanded by Diogo
de Bello, arrives at Goa, lib. 2.
num. 87. pag. 107.
                  A Ship of Cambaya, taken by Dom Alvaro de
Castro, lib. 2. num. 158.
pag. 149.
                  Ships arrive at Goa from Portugall, lib. 4.
num. 37. pag. 225.
                  The order they brought, ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Simaon Feo.
                  Comes with a message from Rumecaon to the
Commander of Dio, lib. 2. num. 66.
pag. 95.
                  The answers he gives him, ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Simaon de Mello.
                  Commander of Malaca, lib. 4. num. 23.
pag. 216.
                  Sends out Dom Francisco d' Eca against the
King of Achem, lib. 4. num. 25.
pag. 217.
                  The Embassage to him from the Confederates,
lib. 4. num. 28.
pag. 219.
                  His answer, lib. 4. num. 29.
pag. 220.
                  His trouble for want of News from the Fleet,
lib. 4. num.
30. ibid.
                  The people complain, and are quell'd by Saint
Francisco Xaverius, by his fore-telling the
Victory, ibid.
               
            
            
               
                  Sultan Mahomud.
                  King of Cambaya, consults how he may take
Dio, lib. 2. num. 2.
pag. 53.
                  He approves oge-Sofar's reason for the design,
lib. 2. num. 8.
pag. 63.
                  
                     omes to Dio with a great Army, lib. 2.
num. 49. pag. 87.
                  Retires upon a Moors being Kill'd, whilst
he was talking with him, lib. 2.
num. 51. pag. 88.
                  Sends another Juzarcaon to continue the Siege,
lib. 2. num. 93.
pag. 111.
                  Rejoyces for the good success of Rumecaon,
lib. 2. num. 171.
pag. 156.
                  His barbarous Revenge, lib. 3. num. 35.
pag. 197.
                  He raises a new Army for another Siege.
lib. 4. num. 35.
pag. 242.
                  The Governour Dom John de Castro faceth
him, and presents him Battail, lib. 4.
num. 49. pag. 232.
                  Which the Sultan refuseth, lib. 4.
num. 51. pag. 233.
                  He severely commands silence about the Siege
and Battail of Dio, lib. 4.
num. 55. pag. 234.
               
            
            
               
                  Surat.
                  Its Territory entered, and destroy'd by Dom
Manoel de Lima, lib. 3. num. 6.
pag. 173.
                  The quitting of the Fortress, upon the sight
of Dom Alvaro's Fleet, lib. 4.
num. 55. pag. 234.
                  The Governour resents the not taking Surat,
ibid.
               
            
         
         
            T.
            
               
                  Tunez.
                  DOm John de Castro's expedition thither,
lib. 1. num. 9. pag. 3.
                  The occasion of it, ibid.
                  The Gentlemen who were in the Fight, lib. 1.
num. 11. pag. 5.
               
            
         
         
            V.
            
               
                  Vasco de Cunha.
                  IS sent by the Governour with Relief to
Dio, lib. 2. num. 177.
pag. 159.
                  Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2. num. 178.
pag. 160.
                  Arrives at Dio, ibid.
               
            
         
         
            W.
            
               
                  Women.
                  THe Courage of the Women in Dio, lib. 2.
num. 55. pag. 68. 79.
117. 130.
                  
                     
The particular Courage of one Portuguese
Woman, lib. 2. num. 78. pag. 102.
                  The women of Chaul offer their Iewells for
the carrying on the Warr, lib. 2.
num. 90. pag. 109.
                  Those of Goa offer their Children and Estates
for the Relief of Dio, lib. 2. num. 177.
pag. 160.
                  And for the Re-building of the Fortress,
lib. 3. num. 31. pag. 194.
                  And upon other occasions, lib. 4.
num. 36. pag. 224.
               
            
         
         
            X.
            
               
                  Xael.
                  DOm Alvaro goes to the City, lib. 4.
num. 90. pag. 251.
                  The Fartaques offer him a Fortress, ibid.
                  Dom Alvaro designs to Scale it, pag. 252.
                  Fernaon Perez is the first who Scales, ibid.
                  The Fartaques defend themselves till Death,
lib. 4. num. 91. ibid.
                  The place is gained, ibid.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         By the Composers not current Reading the Copy, some Faults have crept into the
Impression; the mistake of one Letter in some Tenses, and the putting Or instead of
Nor to answer neither happens often, but is easily Corrected, as are the
mistakes in names of Persons and Places.
      
      
         Errata.
         PReface, p. 2. l. 36. read petentem, p. 11. l. 35. read nor Tears, and so throughout the Book, p. 13. l. 4.
read but in Peace, ibid, l. 7. read strove, p. 14. l. 10. read his Hight, p. 15. l. 1. read affrightning the
place, p. 16. l. 36. read have own'd it, p. 33. l. 3. read ran, p. 37. l. 8. read an Altar-peice, p. 76. l. 6. read
to punish, p. 102. l. 29. read Spear, p. 134. l. 36. read Sentinells, p. 160. l. 15. read Bramaluco, p. 168. l. 32.
read came, p, 173. l. 25. read your Company, p. 195. l. 8. read Zamaluke.
      
   
